Chapter 1

The Neuroanatomical Organization of
the Basal Ganglia
Charles R. Gerfen1 and J. Paul Bolam2
1
2

Laboratory of Systems Neuroscience, National Institute of Mental Health, Dickerson MD, USA
MRC Anatomical Neuropharmacology Unit, Oxford University, Oxford, UK

I.	 Introduction
II.	Overview of Basal Ganglia
Organization
III.	The Corticostriatal System
A.	 Subtypes of Corticostriatal
Neurons
B.	 Patterns of Organization
of Corticostriatal
Afferents
IV.	 Striatum
A.	 Medium Spiny Projection
Neurons
B.	 Synaptic Inputs to Medium
Spiny Neurons
C.	 Striatal Interneurons

V.	Output Systems of the  
Striatum
A.	 The Direct and Indirect
Pathways
B.	 Other Nuclei of the Indirect
Pathway
C.	 Dual Projections within Basal
Ganglia Circuits
VI.	 Basal Ganglia Output Nuclei:
Internal Segment of Globus
Pallidus and Substantia  
Nigra
A.	 Cell Types
B.	 Inputs
C.	 Outputs

I.  Introduction
The basal ganglia connect the cerebral cortex with neural
systems that effect behavior. Most cortical areas provide
inputs to the basal ganglia, which in turn provide outputs
to brain systems that are involved in the generation of
behavior. Among the behavior effector systems targeted
are thalamic nuclei that project to those frontal cortical
areas involved in the planning and execution of movement; midbrain regions including the superior colliculus,
which is involved in the generation of eye movements; the
pedunculopontine nucleus, which is involved in orienting
movements; and hypothalamic systems involved in autonomic functions. Two points concerning the function of the
basal ganglia are emphasized. First, while the basal ganglia
Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function
Copyright © 2010 Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

VII.	The Nigrostriatal Dopamine
System
A.	 Dorsal Tier Versus Ventral
Tier Dopamine Neurons
B.	 Inputs to Dopamine Neurons
VIII.	
Striatal Patch-Matrix
Compartments
A.	 Markers Defining the PatchMatrix Compartments
B.	 Dopamine Inputs to Patches
Versus Matrix
C.	 Cortical and Thalamic Inputs
D.	Outputs of Patches Versus
Matrix
	 References

connect the cerebral cortex with a wide range of behavior
effector systems, the basal ganglia operates in parallel with
other output systems of the cerebral cortex. These other
corticofugal systems may have a more primary role in the
actual generation of behavior. For example, the frontal cortical areas involved in the planning and execution of movement behavior provide direct projections to the spinal cord
that are responsible for the generation of movement. Thus,
the exact role of the basal ganglia in affecting cortically
generated behavior remains a matter of debate (see Part F
of this volume). Second, while the basal ganglia are connected with a wide range of behavior effector systems, not
all regions of the basal ganglia are connected with all of
the output systems. In other words, there is a conservation
of regional functional organization of the cerebral cortex




in the connections of the basal ganglia. In considering the
neuroanatomical organization of the basal ganglia there
are differing views. On the one hand, the basal ganglia
have been proposed to provide for interactions between
disparate functional circuits, for example, between socalled “limbic” and “nonlimbic” functions. Another view
holds that there are parallel functional circuits, in which
distinct functions are for the most part maintained, or segregated, one from the other. This review is biased toward
the view that there is maintenance of parallel functional
circuits in the organization of the basal ganglia, with considerable interactions between adjacent circuits.
Most details of the neuroanatomical and neurophysiological organization of basal ganglia circuits have first
been established in rodents and confirmed in primates.
Accordingly, the present review is mainly based on studies
in rodents (as are the schemes used to illustrate the organizational principles). Several of the following chapters provide detailed information on the functional organization of
the primate basal ganglia.
What are the most significant differences in the organization between rodents and other mammals, notably primates? The most obvious differences between rodents and
primates are those involving the gross anatomy of the nuclei
of the basal ganglia. There are two major examples. The
first is the striatum, which in the primate is subdivided into
caudate nucleus and putamen by the internal capsule that
provides a structural separation between these two nuclei.
This structural separation does provide a gross separation of
functional regions in the striatum in that the caudate nucleus
is mainly the target of prefrontal cortical inputs, whereas the
putamen is the target of motor and somatosensory inputs.
As the cortical input to the striatum is in a large part responsible for its function, the caudate and putamen in the primate are to a major extent functionally distinct. However,
the internal capsule does not provide a precise divider of
functional zones and there is some overlap of inputs from
prefrontal cortex to the putamen. In the rodent, which lacks
such a distinct structural separation, there are nonetheless
regional differences in the striatum which are comparable to
those of the caudate and putamen, again determined by the
regional distribution of inputs from different cortical areas.
The second major gross anatomical difference between
rats and primates involves the internal segment of the globus pallidus. In primates, this nucleus is situated immediately adjacent to the external segment of the globus
pallidus, whereas in rodents, the homologous nucleus is
separated from the external segment of the globus pallidus

Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function

and is embedded in the fiber tract of the internal capsule. In rodents, this nucleus has historically been termed
the entopeduncular nucleus, which reflects its location.
However, as this nucleus is functionally comparable to the
internal segment of the globus pallidus in primates, this
nomenclature is adopted for the present review. Both nuclei
represent, along with the substantia nigra pars reticulata,
which is nearly identical in both rodents and primates, the
output structures of the basal ganglia.
Despite the gross anatomical differences noted, the major
connectional organization of the basal ganglia in rodents and
primates is remarkably similar. Three of the major features
of basal ganglia organization that will be dealt with in some
depth in this review, the organization of direct and indirect
output pathways of the striatum, the patch-matrix compartmental organization of the striatum and the dual projections
of individual striatal neurons, have been demonstrated in
both rodents and primates, and appear in the main, nearly
identical in organization.
Differences in the organization of the basal ganglia
between rodents and primates may for the most part be
attributed to the expanded cortex in primates. In primates,
cortical fields are considerably elaborated and more precisely defined in terms of functional segregation of different cortical areas. While the organization of cortico-striatal
patterns appears to follow the same general principles in
rodents and primates, the elaboration of more detailed
precise mapping patterns appear to predominate in the
primate. Thus, in summary, the major organizational principles of the basal ganglia appear for the most part nearly
identical in rodents and primates.

II.  Overview of basal ganglia
organization
The organization of the basal ganglia is intimately linked
to that of the cerebral cortex, with distinct differences
between those regions of the basal ganglia that receive
inputs from neocortical, six-layered cortex, compared with
those receiving inputs from allocortical areas. This review
focuses primarily on the neocortical part of the basal ganglia. A general canonical organizational plan of the neocortical-related basal ganglia is described (Fig. 1.1). The
components of this canonical basal ganglia system include
the cortex, the striatum, including caudate-putamen and
nucleus accumbens, the external segment of the globus pallidus, the subthalamic nucleus, the internal segment of the
globus pallidus, and the substantia nigra. The major input to

Chapter | 1  The Neuroanatomical Organization of the Basal Ganglia

A



Cerebral cortex

Striatum
CPu
GPe

SC

Thalamus
md
pf
vl

PPN

vm

Nucleus
accumbens

GPi

STN

SNr

Input and output
of the basal ganglia
1.0 mm

B

C

Cerebral cortex

Striatum

In
di
r

o-

co

rti
c

ay

GPe

STN
GPi

Ni g

SNr

Direct and indirect
striatal pathways

Feedback pathways

pf
vl
ost r
iata vm
l

m

Nucleus
accumbens

ala

h

w

a

SC

md

Th

at

y
wa
th
pa

Nucleus
accumbens

m

CPu
tp

GPe

la

Striatum

ec

Di
re
ct

Th
a

l

CPu

Cerebral cortex

ro -

s tr i

Thalamus

a t a l D A p at

SNc

y
hwa

Figure 1.1  Connections of the basal ganglia with the cerebral cortex shown on a sagittal diagram of the rat brain. A. The major input and output
connections of the basal ganglia. Layer 5 pyramidal neurons of most areas of the cerebral cortex provide a major input to the striatum, which comprises
the caudate-putamen (CPu) and the nucleus accumbens. The output of the basal ganglia arises from GABA neurons in the internal segment of the globus pallidus (GPi) and the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr). These neurons provide inhibitory inputs to thalamic nuclei, including the ventral lateral
(vl), mediodorsal (md), ventromedial (vm) nuclei and intralaminar/parafascicular (pf) complex, as well as to the superior colliculus (SC) and pedunculopontine nucleus (PPN). B. The direct and indirect striatal projection pathways arising from two subsets of striatal medium spiny neurons. Direct
projecting neurons provide an axon with collaterals to the external segment of the globus pallidus (GPe) and to the GPi and SNr. Indirect striatal projection neurons project to the GPe. These neurons are indirectly connected to the GPi and SNr through connections that involve the GPe and subthalamic
nucleus (STN). C. Feedback pathways of the basal ganglia include the nigro-striatal dopamine (DA) pathway from the substantia nigra pars compacta
(SNc), a thalamo-striatal pathway from the pf complex to the striatum, and thalamo-cortical pathways from the vl, md and vm thalamic nuclei to the
frontal cortex.

this system comes from layer 5 glutamatergic neurons from
nearly all areas of the neocortex (Fig. 1.1A). The output of
this system are the projections of GABAergic neurons in
the internal segment of the globus pallidus and the substantia nigra pars reticulata (Fig. 1.1A). The basal ganglia output targets thalamic nuclei, which project to frontal cortical
areas involved in the planning and execution of movement
behavior; the intralaminar thalamic nuclei, which provide
inputs to the cortex and the striatum; the intermediate layers
of the superior colliculus, which are involved in the generation of eye and head movements; and the pedunculopontine
nucleus, which is involved in orienting movements of the
body. In between the cortical inputs and the GABAergic
output systems are the neuroanatomical circuits that comprise the prototypical basal ganglia (Fig. 1.1B).

The main input structure of the basal ganglia is the
striatum. Those regions of the striatum that receive inputs
from neocortical areas are the caudate–putamen and core
of the nucleus accumbens. The targets of the cortical input
are medium-sized spiny GABAergic projection neurons,
which account for about 95% of neurons in the striatum.
These neurons are divided into two types, which give rise
to the two main components of the prototypical basal ganglia circuit, the “direct” and “indirect” striatal projection
systems. The direct striatal projection system is so-named
because these neurons provide direct inputs to the output
neurons of the basal ganglia in the internal segment of the
globus pallidus and the substantia nigra pars reticulata.
Indirect striatal projection neurons provide inputs to the
external segment of the globus pallidus, which together



with the subthalamic nucleus compose the major components of the indirect basal ganglia circuit. GABAergic neurons in the external segment of the globus pallidus project
back to the striatum; to the output neurons of the basal
ganglia in the internal segment of the globus pallidus and
substantia nigra; and to the subthalamic nucleus. The subthalamic nucleus, which itself receives inputs from the cortex, provides excitatory projections to the output neurons
of the basal ganglia.
The cerebral cortex and thalamus provide excitatory
inputs to the striatum, whose output, through the direct and
indirect projection systems, provides both inhibitory and
excitatory regulation of the output of the basal ganglia. The
output neurons of the basal ganglia, GABAergic neurons in
the internal segment of the globus pallidus and substantia
nigra pars reticulata, display a relatively high level of tonic
activity. In a long held model of basal ganglia function, the
excitatory input from the cortex has been demonstrated to
function through a disinhibitory mechanism. Thus, activation of the direct striatal output neurons by excitatory input
from the cortex results in inhibition of the tonic inhibitory
output of the basal ganglia. The role of the indirect circuit is more complex. On the one hand, the target of the
indirect striatal output neurons are GABAergic neurons in
the external segment of the globus pallidus, which project
to the output neurons of the basal ganglia and to the subthalamic nucleus. Thus, cortical excitation of the indirect
pathway inhibits the GABAergic pallidal output, resulting
in disinhibition of the output neurons of the basal ganglia
and the subthalamic nucleus. The subthalamic nucleus,
which also receives direct excitatory inputs from the cerebral cortex, provides excitatory inputs to the output neurons
of the basal ganglia. Additionally, it has been demonstrated
that the interconnections between the external segment of
the globus pallidus and subthalamic nucleus generate an
oscillatory pattern of activity that is conveyed to the output neurons of the basal ganglia. Given the complexities
of the organization of these circuits, at this time the exact
mechanisms responsible for regulating the output of the
basal ganglia remain to be established. However, in general terms, activity in the direct and indirect striatal output
pathways may be viewed as providing counterbalanced or
antagonistic regulation of the output of the basal ganglia.
Overlain on the above canonical basal ganglia circuits
are a number of additional neuroanatomical features that
add to the complexity of the organization of this system.
Notable among these is the dopaminergic nigrostriatal
system, which provides a massive dopaminergic input to

Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function

the striatum from the midbrain dopamine neurons in the
ventral tegmental area and substantia nigra pars compacta
(Fig. 1.1C). In addition, this review describes a number of
other features of the basal ganglia organization, including:
(1) the organization of the corticostriatal system, which
incorporates both a general topographic organization with
considerable overlap of corticostriatal inputs from cortical areas that are interconnected; (2) the patch and matrix
compartmental organization of the striatum, which is
related to the laminar organization of the cerebral cortex
and provides differential inputs to the output systems of the
basal ganglia and the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system;
and (3) the dual representation of striatal outputs in the
external segment of the globus pallidus and output nuclei
of the basal ganglia.

III.  The corticostriatal system
The striatum is the main input structure of the basal ganglia and the vast majority of its neurons are medium
spiny projection neurons, whose activity is determined by
excitatory inputs from the cerebral cortex and thalamus.
Consequently, the information that striatal projection neurons transmit within the circuits of the basal ganglia is
largely determined by the activity of corticostriatal (and
thalamostriatal) inputs. Cortical neurons providing striatal inputs are located mostly in layer 5, and in some cases
layer 3, of most cortical areas. All corticostriatal neurons
are pyramidal neurons and utilize glutamate as a neurotransmitter. The following sections provide an overview
of the corticostriatal system. More detailed information on
specific aspects of this system is provided in Chapters 12,
18, 19, 20, 24 and 35.

A.  Subtypes of Corticostriatal Neurons
Subtypes of corticostriatal neurons are distinguished based
on their connections within the cortex, their projections to
other subcortical areas, and their laminar distribution within
the cortex. Two distinct subtypes that have been identified
are the corticostriatal pyramidal tract neuron (PT) and the
corticostriatal intertelencephalic neuron (IT) (Fig. 1.2) (see
Chapter 18). Pyramidal tract corticostriatal neurons are
present in the frontal cortex and provide a major projection
directly to motor neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord
as well as a collateral to the striatum (Donoghue and Kitai,
1981; Landry et al., 1984; Cowan and Wilson, 1994; Lei
et al., 2004). The striatal projections of these neurons are

Chapter | 1  The Neuroanatomical Organization of the Basal Ganglia

A

B
AGm

AGl

250 µm
Intertelencephalic
250 µm
corticostriatal neuron with
Pyramidal tract
extended striatal axon
corticostriatal neuron
with focal striatal axon

A�

B�
Cerebral cortex

Cerebral cortex

Striatum

Striatum

1.0 mm

Figure 1.2  Tracings of dendrites (black) and cortical (A and B) and
striatal axons (A' and B') (grey) of two subtypes of corticostriatal neurons, which had been intracellularly labeled. A. The corticostriatal neuron depicted provides an axonal projection to the pyramidal tract. Axon
collaterals within the cortex are distributed in relatively close proximity
to the parent neuron. A'. The pyramidal tract axon (arrow) of this neuron
gives off collaterals in the striatum, which display a focal terminal arborization. B. The corticostriatal neuron shown, located in the medial agranular cortex (AGm), is a bilaterally projecting cortico-cortical neuron that
also extends axon collaterals bilaterally into the striatum. Axon collaterals within the ipsilateral cortex both distribute locally around the parent
neuron in AGm, and extend to the adjacent lateral agranular (motor) cortical area (AGl). B'. This neuron has an axon that provides an extensive
arborization pattern within the striatum, but does not extend collaterals
beyond the striatum. These neuronal tracings are modified from Cowan
and Wilson (1994).

significant as they provide a copy of the cortical motor signal that directly regulates movement. Intertelencephalic corticostriatal neurons are very numerous in agranular cortical
regions giving rise to bilateral corticocortical and corticostriatal projections. These corticostriatal neurons have extensive connections with other cortical areas. These two types
of corticostriatal cells provide distinct patterns of innervation within the striatum, as exemplified by neurons of the
rat premotor cortex (Fig. 1.2) (Cowan and Wilson, 1994).
The striatal collaterals of PT corticostriatals neurons make
one or more relatively focal arborizations, with dimensions
of 100–500 µm on a side, which suggests a relatively simple topography of the corticostriatal projection formed by



these neurons. On the other hand, IT corticostriatal neurons provide arborizations in a much larger striatal volume,
with dimensions of 1 mm or greater. Within that volume the
axon occupied space in a very sparse fashion, with individual branches running approximately parallel and separated
by large uninnervated areas. This pattern is expected from
the arborization seen for individual corticostriatal neurons
if nearby corticostriatal cells have fine scale similarities in
their axonal arborizations. That is, the pattern of labeling
seen after extracellular injections of anterograde tracers in
the cortex implies that much of the complex topology of
corticostriatal axonal arborizations will be shared among
neighboring cells in the cortex.
Corticostriatal neurons also display specificity in their
targets within the striatum. For example, recent studies indicate that IT and PT corticostriatal neurons differentially target direct and indirect striatal projection
neurons, respectively (Lei et al., 2004) (see Chapter 18).
Additionally, corticostriatal inputs to the striatal patch and
matrix compartments arise from different sublayers within
layer 5 of most cortical areas, with neurons projecting to
the matrix located in more superficial parts of layer 5 than
those projecting to the patch compartment (Gerfen, 1989).
Thus, there appears to be a high degree of specificity in the
targeting of specific striatal neuron subtypes and compartments by distinct subtypes of corticostriatal neurons.

B.  Patterns of Organization of  
Corticostriatal Afferents
A distinct feature of corticostriatal projections is that the
axons of individual neurons are distributed in manner such
that they contact a maximum number of neurons but make
minimal contacts with each postsynaptic neuron (Zheng
and Wilson, 2002). Quantitative data from Wilson and his
colleagues provide informative boundaries for the type of
information processing that may be taking place within the
basal ganglia of the rat. First, there appears to be roughly a
6:1 ratio in terms of the numbers of corticostriatal neurons
(17,000,000) and striatal projection neurons (2,800,000;
Oorschot, 1996) (see Chapter 3). Second, the volume over
which the dendrites of a single medium spiny projection
neuron spread (400 µm in diameter) contains approximately 2850 other neurons. Third, approximately 380,000
corticostriatal neurons innervate the volume of the dendritic
field of a single medium spiny projection neuron, which
contains 2850 neurons. Fourth, a single corticostriatal axon
traversing this area has on average 40 synaptic boutons. If,



as is estimated, each axon makes only a single, or a few
contacts, with a single medium spiny neuron, then each
corticostriatal input makes contact with about 1% of the
striatal neurons in the area across which it extends. Taken
together these quantitative estimates indicate that the cortical input to a single striatal medium spiny projection neuron is rather unique, that is, no two striatal neurons share
common inputs from the cortex. Thus, postsynaptic excitatory activation of individual striatal medium spiny neurons
is dependent on convergent input from multiple corticostriatal neurons. Consequently, the pattern of convergence of
corticostriatal inputs is critical to understanding the information that is transmitted from the cerebral cortex into the
basal ganglia (see also Chapter 19).
Cortical input to the striatum originates from most cortical areas, including primary and higher order sensory
areas; motor, premotor and prefrontal regions; as well as
from limbic cortical areas (see also Chapters 20 and 24).
It is well established that this input is organized in a general topographic manner in that the spatial relationships
between cortical areas are maintained in the projections to
the striatum (Webster, 1961; Carman et al., 1965; Kemp
and Powell, 1970). For example, projections from prefrontal areas are directed mainly to the rostral caudate nucleus,
while cortical inputs from motor cortex terminate primarily
in the rostral putamen (Kunzle 1975). This pattern of the
topographic organization of corticostriatal projections was
embodied in the concept of functional regions within the
striatum being dependent on the cortical origin of inputs to
these regions (Alexander et al., 1986). Thus, dorsal regions
of the striatum receiving inputs from premotor and motor
cortical areas are characterized as “motor” regions of the
striatum, whereas more ventral regions receiving inputs
from limbic cortical areas are characterized as “limbic”.
More complex is the issue of overlapping projections
from functionally related areas. While it is clear that, in
general, cortical areas provide input to a much broader
area of the striatum than accounted for on the basis of topo
graphy alone, the varied and sometimes intricate pattern of
this organization have led to a variety of interpretations as
to the functional significance (see also Chapter 19). While,
the widespread nature of corticostriatal organization is not
in doubt, where some have seen patterns of overlap related
to patterns of cortical connectivity (Yeterian and Hoesen,
1978), others have seen interdigitation (Selemon and
Goldman-Rakic, 1985). Detailed mapping of the organization of corticostriatal inputs has begun to resolve these
issues, showing, in some cases, overlap of inputs from

Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function

interconnected cortical areas that are organized fairly precisely by the somatotopic organization within such areas
(Flaherty and Graybiel, 1991; Parthasarathy et al., 1992;
Flaherty and Graybiel, 1993).

IV.  Striatum
The striatum comprises the caudate nucleus, putamen
and nucleus accumbens. The striatum is composed of one
principal neuron type, the medium-sized spiny projection
neuron (DiFiglia et al., 1976; Wilson and Groves, 1980;
Bishop et al., 1982). This medium spiny projection neuron
makes up as much as 95% or more of the neuron population (Kemp and Powell, 1971) (see Chapter 3); these
neurons are rather homogeneously distributed such that
the striatum lacks distinct cytoarchitectural organization,
as contrasted with the laminar organization of the cortex,
for example. Using retrograde axonal transport methods,
Grofova (1975) established that these neurons are the projection neuron of the striatum. Cortical input to the striatum targets primarily spiny projection neurons (Somogyi
et al., 1981). Thus the spiny projection neuron is the major
input target and the major output neuron of the striatum.
The remaining striatal neurons are interneurons (DiFiglia
et al., 1976; Bishop et al., 1982), in that they do not provide projection axons out of the striatum, but rather distribute axons within the striatum, most of which make synaptic
contact with spiny projection neurons. Despite being relatively infrequent, striatal interneurons constitute a variety
of morphologically and neurochemically defined types
(see Chapter 3). Among these are the large aspiny neurons,
which utilize acetylcholine as a transmitter (Bolam et al.,
1984; Kawaguchi and Kubota, 1993), and medium aspiny
neurons (DiFiglia et al., 1976; Bishop et al., 1982), which
utilize GABA as a transmitter (Kita, 1993). The latter class
of interneurons may be further subdivided on the basis of
different peptides and neurochemicals that they contain
(Kita, 1993; Kubota and Kawaguchi, 1993; Kubota et al.,
1993). These cell types are reviewed in the following sections and are also described in specific chapters in this volume (see below).

A.  Medium Spiny Projection Neurons
Medium spiny projection neurons (see Chapter 5) take
their name from their morphologic appearance (DiFiglia
et al., 1976; Wilson and Groves, 1980; Bishop et al., 1982;
Chang et al., 1982), with a cell body of approximately

Chapter | 1  The Neuroanatomical Organization of the Basal Ganglia

12–20 µm in diameter, from which radiate 7–10 moderately
branched dendrites that are densely laden with spines. The
dendrites of an individual neuron extend over an area of
approximately 200 µm in diameter. These neurons extend a
local axon collateral that remains within the striatum, typically distributed over an area roughly equal in size, but not
necessarily in the same area, as the dendrites of the parent neuron (Bishop et al., 1982; Kawaguchi et al., 1990),
although in some cases it may extend over 1 mm from the
parent neuron (Kawaguchi et al., 1990).
As their name implies, medium spiny projection neurons provide an axon collateral which projects out of the
striatum to the external segment of the globus pallidus and/
or internal segment of the globus pallidus and substantia
nigra (Kawaguchi et al., 1990). Two major subpopulations
of medium spiny neurons, of approximately equal numbers, may be defined on the basis of their projection targets
(Loopuijt and van der Kooy, 1985; Beckstead and Cruz,
1986; Gerfen and Young, 1988; Kawaguchi et al., 1990).
One subset provides an axon projection to the external
segment of the globus pallidus. The other subset provides
a (minor) axon collateral to the external segment of the
globus pallidus, and additional collaterals to the internal
segment of the globus pallidus and/or the substantia nigra.
These latter neurons constitute the “direct striatal projection pathway” as they provide direct inputs to the output

A

Inputs to medium spiny projection neurons
Input to cellbody/proximal dendrites
from interneurons



neurons of the basal ganglia, the GABAergic neurons of
the internal segment of the globus pallidus and substantia
nigra pars reticulata (see Fig. 1.1). The former neurons
constitute the “indirect striatal projection pathway”, as
they are connected indirectly, through connections of the
external segment of the globus pallidus and subthalamic
nucleus, with the output neurons of the basal ganglia.
Medium spiny projection neurons all contain glutamic
acid decarboxylase (GAD), the synthetic enzyme for the
neurotransmitter GABA (Kita and Kitai, 1988). In addition,
most of the neurons projecting to the external segment of
the globus pallidus alone contain the neuropeptide enkephalin, whereas most of those projecting to the internal segment of the globus pallidus and substantia nigra contain
the neuropeptides substance P and dynorphin (Haber and
Watson, 1983; Beckstead and Kersey, 1985; Gerfen and
Young, 1988) (see also below).

B.  Synaptic Inputs to Medium Spiny Neurons
Medium spiny projection neurons receive inputs from the
cortex, thalamus and amygdala, which make asymmetric synapses on dendritic spines, and to a lesser degree,
dendritic shafts (Fig. 1.3). These are the major excitatory
inputs to these neurons. In addition, a number of afferents
from outside the striatum and from within the striatum

B

Connections of medium spiny neurons
Striatal interneurons
PV

Cerebral cortex

ChAT

Dopamine
or GABA inputs
Dopamine
Cortical inputs
Spine
Input to distal dendrites:
Asymmetric (cortical/glutamatergic)
Symmetric (dopamine)
Symmetric (medium spiny/GABA)

Cerebral cortex

D1

D2

Thalamus

Dopamine
Thalamus

Direct
pathway
GPi/EP/SNr

Indirect
pathway
GPe

Figure 1.3  Connections of striatal medium spiny projection neurons. A. Diagram of inputs to medium spiny projection neurons showing the location of cortical glutamatergic synapses on the head of spines, and synapses to the neck and interspine dendritic shafts from nigrostriatal dopamine inputs
or GABAergic inputs from other medium spiny neurons. Inputs to the cell body and proximal dendrites are from striatal GABAergic and cholinergic
interneurons. B. Diagram of the inputs to the proximal and distal parts of medium spiny neurons. Inputs to distal parts of the dendrites are from the cerebral cortex, nigrostriatal dopamine afferents and thalamus, whereas inputs to the proximal part of the neurons are from GABAergic parvalbumin (PV)
and cholinergic (ChAT) interneurons. This organization of inputs appears to be similar for neurons of the direct and indirect pathways, which project,
respectively, to the internal segment of the globus pallidus (GPi) (entopeduncular nucleus, EP, in rat)/substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) and the external segment of the globus pallidus (GPe), and differentially express D1 and D2 dopamine receptors.

10

provide inputs that function to modify the responsiveness of spiny neurons to excitatory input. These include
dopamine afferents from the substantia nigra, inhibitory
GABA (and neuropeptide) inputs from the axon collaterals
of other spiny neurons, inhibitory inputs from GABA (and
peptide)-containing striatal interneurons, and inputs from
cholinergic striatal interneurons (Fig. 1.3).
Corticostriatal afferents make synaptic contact primarily
with the expanded head of dendritic spines on spiny neurons
(Kemp and Powell, 1970; Hattori et al., 1978; Somogyi et
al., 1981; Bouyer et al., 1984). According to a quantitative
study in rats (Xu et al., 1989), of all cortical synapses in the
striatum, about 90% are formed with dendritic spines, and
about 5% with dendritic shafts. The remaining 5% are on
somata. Consistent with their excitatory nature, corticostriatal synapses are almost exclusively asymmetric and contain
small rounded vesicles. Although cortical innervation of the
striatum is relatively dense, as discussed above, input from
any individual corticostriatal axon to an individual striatal
spiny neuron is very sparse (Cowan and Wilson 1994).
Thalamic afferents from the intralaminar nuclei, including
the parafascicular/centromedian complex (see Chapter 22),
provide inputs to the striatum that are similar to cortical
afferents in the number of synapses formed (Lacey et al.,
2005; Raju et al., 2008) and in that they form asymmetric
synaptic contacts and have strong excitatory effects on the
spiny cells (Dube et al., 1988; Xu et al., 1989). There are
two independent thalamostriatal projections of the intralaminar nuclear complex, one originating from the parafascicular/centromedian nuclei and a separate one from rostral
parts of the complex including the central lateral and paracentral nuclei. The latter intralaminar projection, unlike the
cortical input, makes its asymmetrical synaptic contacts
preferentially with the shafts of dendrites rather than the
spines, whereas projections arising from the parafascicular/
centromedian nuclei form synapses similar to those formed
by corticostriatal fibers (Xu et al., 1989; Lacey et al., 2007).
Inputs from midbrain dopamine neurons make synaptic
contact with medium spiny neurons (Fig. 1.3); these have
been identified at the ultrastructural level with immunohistochemical localization of either dopamine (Voorn et al., 1986)
or the dopamine synthesizing enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase
(Arluison et al., 1984; Bouyer et al., 1984; Freund et al.,
1984). Most of these afferents make symmetric synapses and
contain large round and pleiomorphic vesicles. Of 280 synapses examined by Freund et al. (1984), 59% made synaptic
contacts with dendritic spines. Unlike the axospinous synapses formed by cortical or thalamic inputs, these symmetrical

Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function

synapses were usually not made on the head of the spine but
on the neck, and these inputs shared the dendritic spine with
another bouton forming an asymmetrical synapse (probably
from the cerebral cortex or thalamus). Synapses were made
onto dendritic shafts in 35% of the cases, and 6% made synapses with somata (Fig. 1.3). It should be noted, however,
that dopaminergic synapses formed on spines is not a targetted phenomenon, as all striatal structures of a similar size
have equal probability of being in contact with a dopaminergic axon (Moss and Bolam, 2008).
Medium spiny projection neurons have axon collaterals within the striatum that make symmetric synaptic contact
with other spiny neurons (Wilson and Groves, 1980) (see
Chapter 5). Ultrastructural analysis of either intracellularly
labeled axons (Wilson and Groves, 1980), or axons labeled
with immunohistochemical localization of GAD (Bolam et al.,
1985) or substance P (Bolam and Izzo, 1988) show similar
synaptic relationships. Most spiny projection collaterals contact either the interspine shafts or necks of spines of other
spiny projection neurons. These contacts are distributed somewhat closer to the cell body and proximal dendrite parts than
are the more distally distributed dopamine contacts (Fig. 1.3).
Striatal interneurons also provide important inputs to
medium spiny projection neurons. These interneurons are
discussed in more details in the following sections (and in
specific chapters of this volume) and are listed here briefly
(Fig. 1.3). For example, boutons immunoreactive for choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), indicating input from cholinergic interneurons (see Chapter 7), make synaptic contacts
with striatal spiny neurons as well as other striatal cells
(Izzo and Bolam, 1988). These cholinergic synapses are
symmetric and make contact with the cell somata (20%);
dendritic shafts (45%) and with dendritic spines (34%). As
with the other symmetrical synapses on dendritic spines,
they share the spine with an asymmetrical synapse, usually
placed more distally on the spine and resembling afferents
from the cerebral cortex and thalamus.
In addition to the GABAergic spiny projection neurons,
GABAergic interneurons are present within the striatum
(see Chapter 8). GABAergic interneurons were first positively identified by loading with radioactive GABA (Bolam
et al., 1983), and were later recognized as a subset of neurons staining more intensely with immunocytochemistry for
GAD or GABA (e.g., Bolam et al., 1985). More recently, a
subpopulation has been shown to be positive for the calcium-binding protein parvalbumin (Gerfen et al., 1985;
Cowan et al., 1990; Kita et al., 1990). These make numerous symmetrical synapses with the somata and dendrites

Chapter | 1  The Neuroanatomical Organization of the Basal Ganglia

of spiny neurons, as well as other interneurons. More than
any other identified source of input, the synapses from the
parvalbumin/GABA interneuron preferentially innervate
the somata of spiny neurons (Kita et al., 1990).
Another type of aspiny striatal interneurons is identified by its immunocytochemical labeling for somatostatin,
neuropeptide Y, and NADPH diaphorase. These cells have
also been shown to be distinguishable from parvalbumin/
GABA interneurons on the basis of morphological and
physiological criteria (Kawaguchi, 1993). Somatostatinpositive synapses are formed mainly on shafts of dendrites
and dendritic spines of spiny neurons (Takagi et al., 1983).
In addition to the dopamine input from the substantia
nigra, at least two other downstream parts of the basal ganglia provide feedback axons to the striatum. One of these
is the external segment of the globus pallidus, which provides GABAergic input to the striatum (Staines et al. 1981;
Beckstead, 1983; Kita and Kitai, 1994; Bevan et al., 1998)
(see Chapter 14). About a quarter to a third of globus pallidus
neurons project to the striatum and their principal targets are
parvalbumin-positive and NOS-positive GABA interneurons
(Staines and Fibiger, 1984; Bevan et al., 1998). In addition,
the subthalamic nucleus also provides an input to the striatum. This input is relatively sparse as compared to the density
of projections of this nucleus to substantia nigra and globus
pallidus (Kita and Kitai, 1987). Subthalamic input to the striatum appears to provide asymmetric input to spiny neurons.
While dopamine afferents to the striatum provide the
dominant input from the midbrain and brainstem, at least
two other forebrain projection systems provide further
inputs. These include the serotonergic afferents from the
dorsal raphe and the noradrenergic afferents from the locus
coeruleus. Added to the list of sources of inputs to the striatum, not covered in depth by this review, but also important for the functional integrity of the basal ganglia, are
amygdala and hippocampus. Inputs from these structures
are addressed in Chapters 20, 21, 24 and 33.

C.  Striatal Interneurons
Striatal neurons that extend axons within but not out of the
striatum make up 5% or less of the striatal neuron population (Kemp and Powell, 1971; DiFiglia et al., 1976; Bishop
et al., 1982; Chang et al., 1982) (see Chapter 3). This class
of neurons presents a variety of morphologically and neurochemically distinct subtypes. Two major subtypes are
identified (Fig. 1.4). One is the large aspiny neuron, which
utilizes acetylcholine as a neurotransmitter (Bolam et al.,

11

1984; Wilson et al., 1990; Kawaguchi, 1992; Kawaguchi,
1993). The other is the medium-sized aspiny GABAergic
interneuron, of which there are several varieties (Kita,
1993; Kawaguchi et al., 1995).

1.  Large Aspiny Cholinergic Neurons
Striatal cholinergic neurons (see Chapter 7), which utilize
acetylcholine as a neurotransmitter, constitute an important
type of interneurons (Bolam et al., 1984; Wilson et al., 1990;
Kawaguchi, 1993). These neurons are easily identified due
to their large size (DiFiglia et al., 1976; Chang et al., 1982;
Kawaguchi, 1992), with histochemical staining of acetylcholinesterase (Fibiger, 1982), by immunohistochemical studies
A

ChAT neurons

Large aspiny neuron

100 µm
ChAT-IR neurons

B

1 mm

Medium aspiny neuron

Parvalbumin and
somatostatin
neurons

100 µm
Parvalbumin-IR
neurons

Somatostatin-IR
neurons

Parvalbumin-IR
Somatostatin-IR
1 mm

Figure 1.4  Striatal interneurons. A. Large aspiny (cholinergic) interneuron. Tracing of dendrites (black) and axon collaterals (grey) of a large
aspiny neuron (from Wilson et al., 1990) (left, top), and distribution of cell
bodies (black) of striatal neurons immunoreactive for choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) (right) are shown, as well as a photomicrograph of ChATimmunoreactive neurons in the striatum (left, bottom). B. Medium aspiny
interneurons. Tracing of dendrites of a medium aspiny neuron (left, top),
and distribution of cell bodies of parvalbumin- (black dots) and somatostatin-positive (white dots) medium aspiny interneurons within the striatum (right) are depicted. There is an inverse gradient in the distribution of
these two types of striatal interneurons, with parvalbumin neurons more
numerous dorsolaterally, and somatostatin neurons more numerous ventrally. Also shown are photomicrographs of parvalbumin-immunoreactive
(left, middle) and somatostatin-immunoreactive neurons (left, bottom) in
the striatum.

12

employing antibodies directed against the synthetic enzyme
choline acetyltransferase (Bolam et al., 1984; Wilson et al.,
1990; Kawaguchi, 1993) (Fig. 1.4), and by intracellular filling studies (Wilson et al., 1990; Kawaguchi, 1992). Striatal
cholinergic neurons have a very large cell body, up to 40 µm
in diameter, from which extend long aspiny dendrites, which
may split into secondary and tertiary branches. The dendritic
fields may cover an area of over 1 mm with no apparent orientation in any particular axis. Cholinergic neurons extend
an axon, which is both extremely fine but extremely extensive in the area that it covers. Intracellular labeling of identified cholinergic neurons has shown axons from individual
neurons to extend over an area of as much as 2 mm.
Although it is clear that acetylcholine release is important to striatal function, the neuroanatomical substrates
by which this is regulated have been difficult to clearly
identify. One possible mechanism involves the reported
increase in acetylcholine release mediated through activation of substance P receptors. Such a mechanism is
supported by anatomical evidence, not only with the
demonstration of synaptic contacts between substance
P-containing boutons and cholinergic neurons (Bolam
et al., 1986), but also by the localization of substance P
(neurokinin-1) receptor mRNA in cholinergic neurons
(Elde et al., 1990; Gerfen, 1991).

Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function

resistance, shorter duration action potential spikes, and
abrupt repetitive firing (Kubota and Kawaguchi, 1993).
Due to these physiologic features, this type of neuron is
often referred to as a fast-spiking interneuron, which is
similar to the fast-spiking interneurons in the cerebral cortex. These neurons receive inputs from the cerebral cortex, thalamus and globus pallidus and provide inputs to
medium spiny projection neurons. As a result of gap junctions between them, and their high level of activity, these
neurons may provide synchronized feed-forward inhibition
to restricted regions of the striatum. Although distributed
throughout the striatum, parvalbumin neurons are more
frequent in the dorsolateral region, and display a dorsolateral to ventral gradient (Fig. 1.4).
A second class of GABAergic interneurons co-expresses
somatostatin, neuropeptide Y, or nitric oxide synthetase
(Vincent et al., 1983a; Vincent et al., 1983b; Smith and
Parent, 1986; Pasik et al., 1988; Chesselet and Robbins,
1989; Dawson et al., 1991) (Fig. 1.4). The distribution of
somatostatin neurons also appears to follow a gradient, with
higher numbers present in ventral areas than in dorsal areas.
Moreover, while somatostatin neurons are located in both
patch and matrix compartments, their axons within the striatum are preferentially distributed in the matrix compartment.

V.  Output systems of the striatum
2.  Medium Aspiny GABAergic Interneurons
The second major subtype of striatal interneurons is characterized morphologically as a medium-sized aspiny neuron that utilizes GABA as the main neurotransmitter (Ribak
et al., 1979; Bolam et al., 1983; Oertel and Mugnaini,
1984; Smith et al., 1987; Pasik et al., 1988) (see Chapter 8).
Interestingly, isoforms of the GABA synthesizing enzyme
GAD are differentially expressed by medium spiny projection
neurons and medium aspiny interneurons, with GAD67 being
expressed at higher levels in interneurons, compared with
GAD65, which is expressed in projection neurons. Further
classes of GABAergic striatal interneurons are characterized
by the patterns of co-expression of neuropeptides, such as
somatostatin and neuropeptide Y, and calcium-binding proteins such as parvalbumin and calretinin.
The most abundant type of GABAergic interneurons
expresses the calcium-binding protein parvalbumin (Gerfen
et al., 1985; Cowan et al., 1990; Kita et al., 1990; Kubota
and Kawaguchi, 1993) (Fig. 1.4). Parvalbumin interneurons have very distinct neurophysiological characteristics,
marked by a hyperpolarized resting potential, lower input

Medium spiny projection neurons make up some 95% of
the neuron population of the striatum. These neurons have a
common morphology in terms of their size, dendritic organization and local axon collaterals, which extend within the
striatum around the parent neuron. Each of these neurons provides an axon that projects out of the striatum. As mentioned
above, medium spiny neurons are divided into two subsets
of approximately equal numbers and contribute to projection
pathways that provide either direct or indirect input to the
output neurons of the basal ganglia in the internal segment of
the globus pallidus and substantia nigra (Fig. 1.5).

A.  The Direct and Indirect Pathways
Studies in which individual neurons were intracellularly
filled provide the clearest evidence for subsets of medium
spiny projection neurons on the basis of the projection axons
(Kawaguchi et al., 1990). One type of neuron sends an
axon collateral into the external segment of the globus pallidus, which does not arborize extensively, and extends
other axon collaterals into the internal segment of the

Chapter | 1  The Neuroanatomical Organization of the Basal Ganglia

13

Figure 1.5  The striatal medium spiny projection neuron. A. Photomicrograph of a single medium spiny projection neuron filled with biocytin. A’.
High magnification of the intracellularly filled medium spiny neuron in A. B. Tracings of an indirect and a direct striatal projection neuron drawn in
place on a sagittal brain diagram. The indirect pathway neuron has a projection axon that extends into the external segment of the globus pallidus (GPe),
where it arborizes extensively, but does not extend beyond this nucleus. Direct pathway neurons have projection axons that extend some collaterals
into the GPe and project to the internal segment of the globus pallidus (GPi) and the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr). Higher magnification of the
indirect and direct pathway neurons shows their dendrites (black) (red and green) and local axon collaterals within the striatum (grey) (orange and blue).
Abbreviations: STN, subthalamic nucleus; VTA, ventral tegmental area; SNc, substantia nigra pars compacta; RR, retrorubral area. C. Functional dissociation of direct and indirect striatal projection neurons. In dopamine-depleted striatum, D1 dopamine receptor stimulation results in phosphorylation
of ERK1/2/MAPkinase (green immunoreactive neurons) selectively in direct pathway neurons. Indirect pathway neurons are labeled by localization of
mRNA encoding enkephalin (ENK; red neurons). In this field, one neuron is double-labeled for both markers (yellow diagonal arrow). This functional
dissociation reflects the differential expression of D1 and D2 receptor subtypes by these neurons (Gerfen et al., 2002; see text). D. Diagram of the direct
and indirect pathway neurons. Both neurons are GABAergic and receive glutamatergic corticostriatal inputs. Direct pathway neurons express the D1
receptor subtype, the Gs and Golf stimulatory G-proteins, as well as the neuropeptides substance P (SP) and dynorphin (DYN). These neurons project
to the GPe, GPi and SNr. Indirect pathway neurons express the D2 receptor, the A2A adenosine receptor, and the neuropeptide ENK. The D2 receptor is
coupled to the inhibitory Gi G-protein, while the A2A receptor is coupled to the stimulatory Golf G-protein. (see Color Plate Section to view the color
version of this figure)

globus pallidus and/or the substantia nigra (Fig. 1.5). This
type is referred to as a direct pathway neuron in that it provides direct inputs to the output nuclei of the basal ganglia.
(In rats, this neuron is often also called “striatonigral” neuron, based on its main projection target.)
A second type (the “striatopallidal” neuron) provides
an axon that extends into the external globus pallidus and
arborizes there extensively (Fig. 1.5), usually in two separate domains within this nucleus (see below). These neurons do not project beyond the globus pallidus and are
thus termed “indirect” striatal projection neurons, in that
they connect indirectly to the output of the basal ganglia,

through synaptic connections in the globus pallidus and
subthalamic nucleus. It is noteworthy that “direct” projection neurons also provide inputs to the globus pallidus,
and thus contribute to the “indirect” pathway system. The
extent of arborization of this axon collateral is less than
that of the indirect projection neuron; however, it exists
and appears to make functional synapses with pallidal neurons. Future studies will have to elucidate the functional
significance of this collateral.
A major discovery concerning the function of dopamine
in the basal ganglia was the demonstration that D1 and D2
dopamine receptors are segregated in the direct and indirect

14

striatal projection neurons (Gerfen et al., 1990) (Fig. 1.5).
The mRNA encoding the D1 receptor subtype was shown
to be selectively localized in neurons that project to the substantia nigra, and co-localized with substance P and dynorphin, which are selectively expressed by direct projection
neurons. Conversely, the mRNA encoding the D2 receptor is selectively localized in neurons that project to the
external segment of the globus pallidus and is co-localized
with enkephalin, which is selectively expressed in indirect projection neurons. Only a relatively small proportion
of neurons express both D1 and D2 receptor mRNAs at
comparable levels. While initially somewhat controversial
(Surmeier et al., 1992), the general organizational principle
of segregated D1 and D2 receptor expression in direct and
indirect pathway neurons, respectively, has been confirmed
by numerous other studies (e.g., Le Moine et al., 1990; Le
Moine et al., 1991; Gerfen et al., 1995; Hersch et al., 1995;
Le Moine and Bloch, 1995; Yung et al., 1995; Surmeier
et al., 1996; Gong et al., 2003; Gong et al., 2007) and is
consistent with receptor binding localization for D1 and
D2 receptors in the globus pallidus and substantia nigra,
respectively (e.g., Beckstead, 1988; Richfield et al., 1989)
(see also Chapters 6 and 28).
The demonstration of a segregation of D1 and D2
receptors in direct and indirect pathway neurons, respectively (Gerfen et al., 1990), provided the basis for understanding of functional changes in movement disorders
such as Parkinson’s disease (Albin et al., 1989; DeLong,
1990). The central tenet of the theory of movement disorders is that they result from imbalanced activity in the
direct and indirect striatal pathways (see also Chapter
39). In Parkinson’s disease, which is marked by akinesia,
the theory suggested that there is increased activity in the
indirect pathway. Neurons of this pathway express the D2
receptor, which is coupled to the inhibitory G protein, Gi.
In the normal animal, dopamine binding to the D2 receptors provides an inhibitory function. On the other hand, the
D1 receptor expressed on direct pathway neurons is coupled to stimulatory G proteins, Gs and Golf. Consequently,
in Parkinson’s disease, the loss of dopamine input to the
striatum has opposite effects on the direct and indirect
pathways, with increased function in the indirect pathway
and decreased function in the direct pathway.

B.  Other Nuclei of the Indirect Pathway
Indirect striatal projection neurons extend an axon to the
external segment of the globus pallidus, but do not project

Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function

axon collaterals to either the internal segment of the globus pallidus or substantia nigra. Consequently, indirect
striatal projection neurons are connected with the output
of the basal ganglia indirectly, through the external globus
pallidus and subthalamic nucleus. GABAergic neurons of
the external segment of the globus pallidus, the targets of
the indirect striatal projection neurons, provide inputs to
both the internal segment of the globus pallidus/substantia
nigra pars reticulata, as well as to the subthalamic nucleus.
The subthalamic nucleus provides a glutamatergic, excitatory input to the internal segment of the globus pallidus
and substantia nigra. These two nuclei are reviewed in
the following sections and are also addressed in Chapters
13, 14 and 15.

1.  External Segment of the Globus Pallidus
There are two major cell types within the external segment of the globus pallidus (Kita and Kitai, 1994) (see
Chapter 13). One type has a moderate to large cell soma
from which radiate 3–5 dendrites with secondary and tertiary segments (Fig. 1.6); these are aspinous over their entire
length and display some varicosities. The dendrites of these
neurons are often long, up to 300–400 µm, giving a total
maximal dendritic coverage of over 1 mm in some cases.
Some aspiny neurons display a discoidal dendritic field
in that the dendrites spread mainly in a two-dimensional
manner parallel to the border between the external segment of the globus pallidus and striatum. Other aspiny
neurons have dendrites that cover a volume with a more
3-dimensional distribution. A second type of pallidal
neuron is distinguished by the spines distributed on its
dendrites. The cell bodies of these neurons are generally
smaller than those of the aspiny neurons. However, the
size and extent of the dendritic fields appear to be similar
for the two types, except that spiny neurons do not display discoid dendrites. Although all pallidal projection
neurons appear to utilize GABA as a transmitter, the differences in morphology are matched by some neurochemical differences. For example, the larger discoidal-type
dendrite-bearing neurons contain the calcium-binding protein parvalbumin, whereas the other pallidal projection
neurons do not (Kita and Kitai, 1994). Parvalbumin-positive neurons are the more abundant of the two types.
The projections appear to be somewhat different
between the two morphologically and neurochemically
distinct pallidal neuron populations (Kita and Kitai, 1994a;
Kita and Kitai, 1994b). Parvalbumin-positive/discoidal
dendrite-bearing neurons provide axon collaterals to the

Chapter | 1  The Neuroanatomical Organization of the Basal Ganglia

B

A
GPe

GPe

0.5 mm
Striatopallidal inputs

Globus pallidus
neurons

C
Striatum

100 µm

GPe

STN

1.0 mm
Globus pallidus
neurons

SNr

GPi

D
Striatum

GPe

100 µm

1.0 mm
Subthalamic nucleus
neurons

STN
GPi

SNr

Figure 1.6  Components of the indirect striatal output pathway. A.
Tracing of the striatopallidal axons of a single indirect striatal projection
neuron in the sagittal plane. Of note are the double arborization zones
within the globus pallidus external segment (GPe) from a single striatal neuron. B. Tracings of the dendrites of two GPe neurons in the sagittal plane. Of note is the distribution of the dendrites, which conforms
to the same pattern as the striatal afferent axons. The two regions of the
GPe, which are defined by the dual terminal patterns of striatal afferents,
appear to have distinct populations of pallidal neurons. C. Tracing of a
single GPe neuron (dendrites in white in sagittal section) and its axon
(black) which provides collaterals to the striatum, subthalamic nucleus
(STN) and substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr). A larger tracing of the
dendrites of this neuron is shown on the right. Other GPe neurons also
project to the globus pallidus internal segment (GPi) (entopeduncular
nucleus in rat). D. Tracing of a single STN neuron (dendrites in white in
sagittal section) and its axon (black) which provides collateral inputs to
the GPe, GPi and SNr.

subthalamic nucleus, internal segment of the globus pallidus and substantia nigra (Fig. 1.6C), whereas the descending projection of the parvalbumin-negative pallidal neuron
is directed primarily to the subthalamic nucleus. Both neuron types appear to also project to the striatum, although
not all pallidal neurons provide such a projection (see
also Chapter 14).

15

Most pallidal neurons are GAD-immunopositive and
are thus presumed to utilize GABA as a neurotransmitter (Oertel and Mugnaini, 1984; Smith et al., 1987; Pasik
et al., 1988). This is consistent with the fact that synaptic
contacts of pallidal axon terminals with their target neurons are symmetric (Smith and Bolam, 1989; Smith and
Bolam, 1990; Smith and Bolam, 1991). In addition to GADimmunopositive neurons, there are a scattering of cholinergic neurons within the body of the globus pallidus, as well as
a large number of cholinergic neurons ventral to the globus
pallidus (Fibiger, 1982; Ingham et al., 1985; Grove et al.,
1986). In as much as these neurons appear to be the target
of some projections from both the dorsal and ventral striatum, these cholinergic neurons might be considered to be
part of the basal ganglia (Grove et al., 1986). These cholinergic neurons have been shown to provide projections to the
cerebral cortex (Fibiger, 1982; Saper, 1984; Ingham et al.,
1985; Grove et al., 1986; Ingham et al., 1988).
Neurons in the external segment of the globus pallidus receive inputs directly from the striatum (Chang
et al., 1981; Wilson and Phelan, 1982; Hedreen and
DeLong, 1991), which are inhibitory (Park et al., 1982),
and inputs from the subthalamic nucleus, which are excitatory (Kita and Kitai, 1987). Inputs from the striatum
appear to be the dominant inputs to pallidal neurons and
display a distinct synaptic organization (DiFiglia et al.,
1982). Individual fibers from the striatum entwine dendrites of pallidal neurons, making numerous synaptic
contacts along an extended region of a dendrite. These synapses are symmetric and on the order of 1µm in diameter.
The synaptic organization of the external segment of
the globus pallidus, where afferent axons make multiple
contacts thus appearing to ensheath pallidal dendrites, has
possible consequences for convergence of striatal afferents.
The radial orientation of pallidal neuron dendrites, orthogonal to the plane of striatal efferent fibers, had suggested
a means of convergence in that individual pallidal neurons
would spread dendrites across the paths of outputs of many
regions of the striatum. However, an alternative organization is suggested by the fact that individual striatal efferents, rather than remaining “on course” as they traverse the
globus pallidus, in fact follow local paths to entwine individual pallidal neuron dendrites. This might suggest that in
fact individual striatal efferent neurons make a rather direct
transfer to few rather than many pallidal neurons. Such an
organization would be decidedly different from that of cortical afferents to the striatum, in which individual axons
contact the dendrites of many neurons “en passant”.

16

As mentioned above, descending output of the external segment of the globus pallidus to other components of
the basal ganglia is directed principally to the subthalamic
nucleus and to the internal segment of the globus pallidus
and the substantia nigra (Haber et al., 1985; Kita and Kitai,
1994). Ascending outputs of the globus pallidus provide
feedback to the striatum (Staines et al., 1981; Beckstead,
1983; Staines and Fibiger, 1984) (see also Chapters 14
and 24). In addition, there is a projection from the ventral
pallidum to the thalamus (Haber et al., 1985; Mogenson
et al., 1987; Haber et al., 1993) (see also Chapter 21).
Of particular note is the synaptic organization of pallidal projection terminals, particularly those that provide
input to the internal pallidal and substantia nigra neurons.
Pallidal afferents onto these neurons are directed to the cell
soma and proximal dendrites, whereas the striatal afferent
input is directed to the same neurons’ more distal dendrites
(Smith and Bolam, 1989; Smith and Bolam, 1990; Smith
and Bolam, 1991).

2.  Subthalamic Nucleus
Based on cellular and dendritic morphology neurons in the
subthalamic nucleus appear to be of one main type (Fig.
1.6D), which nonetheless show a variance in the dimensions of the cell soma and dendritic ramifications (Kita et
al., 1983a) (see also Chapter 15). In rats the cell soma is
ovoid or polygonal with a medium size ranging 10–20 µm
in diameter. Most subthalamic neurons extend 3–4 primary
dendrites which taper and branch into secondary and tertiary dendrites. Dendrites show infrequent spines, which,
if present, are located on more distal parts of the dendrites. The dendrites spread in varying patterns within
the nucleus. In general, dendrites appear to distribute in
an ovoid area in both the frontal and sagittal planes, thus
showing a greater extension in the rostro-caudal dimension than in the dorso-ventral dimension. In the horizontal
plane, dendrites appear to distribute roughly equally in the
medial-lateral dimension as in the rostro-caudal dimension.
Subthalamic neurons across species appear to be similar in
morphologic type, although the planar distribution patterns
of the dendrites vary from species to species. This presumably reflects different geometries of the afferent inputs in
different species.
Neurons in the subthalamic nucleus appear to be of
one neurochemical type in that most are immunoreactive
for glutamate. This is consistent with the fact that the synapses of subthalamic afferents to neurons in both segments
of the globus pallidus and substantia nigra are asymmetric

Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function

(Kita and Kitai, 1987). Moreover, the electrophysiologic
response of neurons postsynaptic to subthalamic afferents
following stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus confirms
the excitatory nature of these inputs (Nakanishi et al.,
1987b; Robeldo and Féger, 1990).
Neurons in the subthalamic nucleus receive inputs from
the external segment of the globus pallidus, which are
inhibitory (Kita et al., 1983b), and inputs from the cortex,
which are excitatory (Kita et al., 1983b; Nakanishi et al.,
1987a; Nakanishi et al., 1988). Inputs from the cortex are
asymmetric and distributed principally to the dendrites of
the neurons. Inputs from the external segment of the globus
pallidus make large symmetric contact which are directed
relatively equally to the cell soma (30%), proximal (39%)
and distal (31%) dendrites (Smith et al., 1990). This input
is distinguished from pallidal inputs to the substantia nigra
in which 90% of the synaptic contact is made with the
soma or proximal dendrites (Smith and Bolam, 1990).
Neurons in the subthalamic nucleus send axons that
target neurons in both segments of the globus pallidus and
substantia nigra (Fig. 1.6D), as well as a sparse projection
to the striatum (Kita and Kitai, 1987). These projections
provide an excitatory input to each of the target structures
(Saper, 1984; Ingham et al., 1985; Nakanishi et al., 1987b;
Robeldo and Féger, 1990; Kita and Kitai, 1991).

C.  Dual Projections within Basal  
Ganglia Circuits
A distinctive feature of striatal output organization is
the dual projections from the striatum to subdivisions
of the globus pallidus and substantia nigra (Chang et al.,
1981; Wilson and Phelan, 1982; Gerfen, 1985) (Fig. 1.7).
Initially described in the rat, this organization has also
been observed in the primate (Parent and Hazrati, 1994).
Thus, striatal projections to the globus pallidus have extensive axon arborizations in a region immediately adjacent to
the striatum, and a second arborization zone in the central
part of the globus pallidus (Figs 1.6A, 1.7). In the case of
the striatopallidal pathway, the dual projections have been
demonstrated to arise from individual striatal neurons
(Chang et al., 1981). The dual striatonigral projection targets a region in the dorsal part of the substantia nigra pars
reticulata, and a second zone that lies immediately above
the cerebral peduncle (Fig. 1.7). It has not been demonstrated whether individual striatal neurons contribute projections to both zones of the pars reticulata, although this is
likely. At the least they arise from within the striatal matrix

Chapter | 1  The Neuroanatomical Organization of the Basal Ganglia

A

Striatum
GPe

Dual striatal projections
to GPe and SNr
SNr

B

GPe

Dual subthalamic projections
to GPe and SNr
STN
SNr

Figure 1.7  Dual projection systems in direct and indirect pathways.
A. Illustration of the dual projections from the striatum to the globus pallidus external segment (GPe) and substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr)
are shown. B. The dual projections from the subthalamic nucleus (STN)
to the GPe and the SNr are depicted. In each system afferents target the
same two regions in the GPe, an area immediately adjacent to the striatum and a second area more central, and the same two regions in the SNr,
an area medial and dorsal adjacent to the substantia nigra pars compacta
and a second area situated ventrally against the cerebral peduncle. The
dual target zones in both the GPe and SNr have neurons whose dendrites
appear to conform to the pattern of afferents to these regions. Individual
striatal neurons and individual subthalamic neurons provide collaterals to
both regions in each nucleus.

and from very closely associated neurons. These dual
projection systems are not to be confused with the patchmatrix projections (see Section below).
The dual nature of inputs to the globus pallidus and
substantia nigra is not only found in the striatal projections
to these nuclei. Kita and Kitai (1987) have also observed
a similar organization in the projection of the subthalamic
nucleus to these nuclei (Fig. 1.7B). The projection patterns
charted in their study bear a remarkable resemblance to
those from the striatum. This suggests that this aspect of
the organization of basal ganglia circuits is maintained not
only in the organization of striatal outputs but also in the
organization amongst the nuclei that are the targets of this
striatal projection.
In both segments of the globus pallidus and in the substantia nigra the dendritic morphology of neurons conforms
to the dual innervation patterns from the striatum (Gerfen,
1985). Thus, in the external segment of the globus pallidus,
neurons in the region that is immediately adjacent to the
striatum have dendrites that are distributed in a pattern that
conforms to a “shell”-like region of the globus pallidus,

17

whereas dendrites of neurons in the central region of the
globus pallidus are restricted to the central region and do
not appear to extend into the pallidal “shell” region (Kita
and Kitai, 1994) (Fig. 1.6B). Note that neurons in different
pallidal regions are likely to have different local connections (Sadek et al., 2007). Similarly, in the substantia nigra
there are two zones of neurons in the pars reticulata (ignoring the dopamine neurons in the pars reticulata, see Section
below). Again, as in the globus pallidus there is one region
that forms a “shell”-like structure, in this case forming a
region immediately above the cerebral peduncle, and a
dorsal zone that is between the ventral “shell” region and
the pars compacta. Neurons in these two regions have dendrites that are distributed so as to conform with the shape
of the regions (Grofova et al., 1982). This organization was
first described by Grofova et al. (1982) based on the morphology of the dendrites of pars reticulata neurons.
The organization of the substantia nigra pars reticulata
into subregions appears not only to be related to the inputs
from the striatum and subthalamic nucleus, but also to the
organization of its outputs. The projections of the substantia
nigra pars reticulata to the thalamus and to the superior colliculus (see following Section) appear to maintain a rough
topography. This organization has been described by Gerfen
et al. (1982) and in considerable details by Deniau and
Chevalier (1992). Thus, projections to the ventral medial,
mediodorsal, and intralaminar thalamus, as well as those
to the superior colliculus, display a topographic organization. This topography involves both the central and peripeduncular “shell” region of the pars reticulata. Neurons
projecting to a particular topographically related part of
any of these structures arise in one of the two pars reticulata regions. This organization of the nigral output neurons
was described by Deniau and Chevalier (1991) to have the
appearance of distinct lamellae, much like that of an onion.
The dual nature of these basal ganglia projection systems has repeatedly been remarked upon (e.g., Gerfen et al.,
1982; Deniau and Chevalier, 1992; Redgrave et al., 1992).
However, its functional significance remains unclear.

VI.  Basal ganglia output nuclei:
internal segment of globus 
pallidus and substantia nigra
Together, the internal segment of the globus pallidus and
the substantia nigra are considered the output nuclei of the
basal ganglia in that they provide the interface with brain
areas outside the basal ganglia, in particular the thalamus

Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function

18

and midbrain structures, including the superior colliculus
and pedunculopontine nucleus (Fig. 1.8) (see Chapter 23).
The neurons that provide these output projections utilize
GABA as a transmitter and form a nuclear complex that
is continuous from the internal segment of the globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata. In addition to the
GABA neurons in these nuclei, dopamine neurons in the
substantia nigra pars compacta provide a feedback pathway to the striatum (see following section).
For the purposes of the present review, details concerning the synaptic connections of the GABA neurons in the
substantia nigra pars reticulata are provided. These are
comparable to those of the neurons in the internal segment
of the globus pallidus, which are addressed in detail in
Chapter 13. The distinctions between these nuclei are due
to the parts of the body that they are related to. The substantia nigra pars reticulata is involved in movements of the
eyes, head and neck, whereas the internal segment of the
globus pallidus is involved in limb and axial movements.

A.  Cell Types
As mentioned above, the substantia nigra is composed
of two main neuronal types, those that utilize dopamine
(Bjorklund and Lindvall, 1984) and those that utilize
GABA as a neurotransmitter (Ribak et al., 1979; Oertel
and Mugnaini, 1984; Pasik et al., 1988). Dopamine neurons are located primarily in the pars compacta, which is a
Superior
colliculus

lh
Thalamus
md

PPN

vl
vm

pf

GPi
SNr

Figure 1.8  Basal ganglia output pathways. Output pathways arise
from GABAergic neurons of the internal segment of the globus pallidus (GPi) and substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr). The GPi output is
directed to the ventral lateral (vl) thalamic nucleus, intralaminar/parafascicular (pf) complex and to the lateral habenula (lh). The SNr output is
directed to the paralamellar mediodorsal (md), pf and ventromedial (vm)
thalamic nuclei, to the intermediate layers of the superior colliculus and
to the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus (PPN).

neuron-dense zone forming the dorsal part of the substantia
nigra (Gerfen et al., 1987b) (dopamine neurons are discussed in detail in the following section and in Chapter 16).
In addition, dopamine neurons are also located in groupings in the ventral neuron-sparse zone, the pars reticulata.
Dopamine neurons in the substantia nigra, as well as those
in the adjacent ventral tegmental area and retrorubral area
provide inputs to the striatum and other forebrain areas
(Beckstead, 1979; Ribak et al., 1979; Oertel and Mugnaini,
1984; Gerfen et al., 1987a,b; Pasik et al., 1988). GABA
neurons are localized, for the most part, in the pars reticulata. These neurons provide inputs to the thalamus, superior colliculus and pedunculopontine nucleus (Beckstead,
1979; Ribak et al., 1979; Gerfen et al., 1982; Oertel and
Mugnaini, 1984; Pasik et al., 1988).

B.  Inputs
The major sources of input to substantia nigra neurons are
inhibitory GABAergic inputs from the striatum and external segment of the globus pallidus, and excitatory inputs
from the subthalamic nucleus (see previous sections). That
the striatum provides an inhibitory GABAergic input to
pars reticulata neurons has been established using electrophysiologic techniques (Deniau et al., 1976; Chevalier
et al., 1985; Deniau and Chevalier, 1985). The external
segment of the globus pallidus has more recently been
established to provide a similar inhibitory input. The synaptic organization of these inputs to the pars reticulata
was described in a comprehensive analysis by Smith and
Bolam (Smith and Bolam, 1989; Smith and Bolam, 1990;
Smith et al., 1990). In these studies, axonally transported
tracer labeling of striatal and pallidal input to identified
pars reticulata neurons projecting to the superior colliculus
were examined at the light and electron microscopic level.
Striatal input to pars reticulata neurons form symmetric,
relatively small synapses directed principally to distal parts
of the dendrites (77% of such input), and only infrequently
to the cell soma (3%). In contrast, inputs from the globus
pallidus form symmetric, relatively large synapses directed
principally to the perikarya (54% of such input), or to
proximal dendrites (32%). The differential distribution of
inputs from the striatum and globus pallidus to the distal
and more proximal dendrites suggests that, if the inputs are
comparable in number, the latter afferent system may exert
a dominant control over these pars reticulata neurons.
Afferents from the subthalamic nucleus to the pars
reticulata provide an excitatory input mediated by the

Chapter | 1  The Neuroanatomical Organization of the Basal Ganglia

neurotransmitter glutamate (Kita and Kitai, 1987; Nakanishi
et al., 1987b). At the synaptic level these inputs form
asymmetric contacts principally directed to more distal
parts of the dendrites of pars reticulata neurons (Kita and
Kitai, 1987). Thus, the distribution pattern of these afferents is similar to that of the striatal inputs.

C.  Outputs
Output targets of the substantia nigra pars reticulata include
the thalamus, superior colliculus and the pedunculopontine
nucleus (Beckstead, 1979; Gerfen et al., 1982; Kita and
Kitai, 1987; Nakanishi et al., 1987b; Deniau and Chevalier,
1992) (Fig. 1.8). In the thalamus, nigral efferents are
directed to two main parts. The first are the set of nuclei,
including the intralaminar nuclei, that project back to the
striatum (see also Chapter 22). The second thalamic target
are nuclei that provide projections to frontal cortical areas.
The specific nuclei involved vary from species to species,
primarily as a consequence of the organization of cortex.
For example, in rodents, the principal target of the substantia nigra is the ventromedial thalamic nucleus, which provides a relatively widespread input to frontal cortical areas,
and the paralaminar medial dorsal thalamus, which in turn
projects to the cortical areas thought to be equivalent to the
frontal eye fields in primates. Conversely, in primates where
frontal cortical areas are subdivided into more discrete areas
(see also Chapter 24), thalamic inputs to these areas are correspondingly organized. In primates, the principal thalamic
targets of the internal segment of the globus pallidus are the
ventral lateral, pars oralis and ventral anterior, pars parvocellularis nuclei (Schell and Strick, 1984), and the target of
the substantia nigra is the ventral anterior (VAmc) and paralaminar medial dorsal (MDpc) nuclei (Ilinsky et al., 1985).
Many individual pars reticulata neurons have collaterals
that target two or more of these targets.

VII.  The nigrostriatal dopamine
system
Dopamine neurons in the ventral midbrain, which can
be labeled by tyrosine hydroxylase immunolabeling are
the origin of the nigrostriatal dopamine system (Fig. 1.9)
(see also Chapters 16 and 17). Midbrain areas that contain dopamine neurons include the ventral tegmental
area, which is the ventral medial most region of the midbrain, the substantia nigra, including the pars compacta,
in which dopamine neurons are densely packed, and the

19

pars reticulata, which is relatively cell sparse compared
to the pars compacta, and the retrorubral area, which lies
caudal and dorsal to the substantia nigra (Bjorklund and
Lindvall, 1984; Gerfen et al., 1987b) (Fig. 1.9). The designation of the subgroupings of dopamine neurons according to regional location – A10 cell group in the ventral
tegmental area, A9 cell group in the substantia nigra,
and A8 cell group in the retrorubral area – conforms to
some extent with their projection targets (Bjorklund and
Lindvall, 1984). The A10 dopamine cell group is generally regarded to project to limbic forebrain areas, such as
the septal area, prefrontal cortex, olfactory tubercle and
nucleus accumbens. The A9 and A8 cell groups are generally regarded as the origin of the projection to the striatum.

A.  Dorsal Tier Versus Ventral Tier  
Dopamine Neurons
Dopamine innervation of the striatum (Bjorklund and
Lindvall, 1984) is relatively dense and when considered
in total appears rather uniform. However, this belies an
underlying organization of the nigrostriatal system into
patch- and matrix-directed subsystems (Gerfen et al.,
1987a,b; Jimenez-Castellanos and Graybiel, 1987; Langer
and Graybiel, 1989) (Fig. 1.9). The first indication of the
compartmental organization of the nigrostriatal dopamine
system came from developmental studies which revealed
that in the early postnatal striatum dopamine input is distributed in patches (dopamine “islands”), and that during subsequent development innervation of the matrix
is completed (Olson et al., 1972; Tennyson et al., 1972).
Neuroanatomical tracing studies demonstrated that this
developmental sequence is a consequence of the dopamine
projections to the patch and matrix compartments arising
from distinct sets of dopamine neurons in the substantia
nigra (Gerfen et al., 1987a,b).
Dopamine neurons that project to the striatum are distributed in each of these groups, including the A10 cell
group. As is also seen, these neurons are distributed in a
somewhat continuous manner, such that delineation of
subgroupings based on regional location is somewhat
arbitrary. A different parcellation of these neurons is suggested based on the morphology of neuronal dendrites, the
expression of the calcium-binding protein calbindin, and
their projection to either the patch or matrix compartments
(Gerfen et al., 1987a,b). Using these determinants the
projection of midbrain dopamine neurons to the striatum
reveals the following organization. Two sets of dopamine

20

Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function

Figure 1.9  Organization of the nigrostriatal dopamine pathway. The illustration shows the organization of the dopamine (DA) projections from the
midbrain to the striatal patch and matrix compartments (sagittal diagram, upper left). The coronal section at a mid-striatal level (A) depicts the innervation of the patch and matrix compartments from different subsets of midbrain DA neurons, shown at three rostrocaudal levels (B,C,D). DA neurons
providing inputs to the striatal matrix compartment (light grey in B,C,D) (orange in B,C,D) are located in the ventral tegmental area (B,C,D: VTA; A10
DA cell group), in the dorsal tier of the substantia nigra pars compacta (B,C: SNc; A9) and in the retrorubral area (D: RR; A8). Neurons providing input
to the striatal patch compartment (dark grey in B,C,D) (blue in B,C,D) are located in the ventral tier of the SNc (B,C,D; A9) and in the substantia nigra
pars reticulata (C,D: SNr; A9). Dorsal tier neurons express the calcium-binding protein calbindin, whereas ventral tier neurons are calbindin-negative.
There is a general topography in that medially located cells project to the ventral striatum and laterally located cells project to the dorsal striatum.
Neurons at every rostral–caudal level in the midbrain project rather extensively to throughout the rostral–caudal extent of the striatum. (see Color Plate
Section to view the color version of this figure)

neurons are distinguished and these are localized in a dorsal and a ventral tier (Fig. 1.9).
The dorsal tier set provides inputs predominantly to the
striatal matrix compartment. This set encompasses a continuous group that includes the dopamine neurons projecting to the striatum situated in the ventral tegmental area,
the dorsal part of the substantia nigra pars compacta, and

the retrorubral area (Fig. 1.9). Several other ­ characteristics
apply to this set. First, those neurons in the pars compacta
are distinguished from the ventral tier neurons by the extension of their dendrites within the plane of the pars compacta.
Second, most of the dorsal tier neurons express, in addition to dopamine, the calcium-binding protein calbindin.
Third, there is a rough topography to the ­ organization of

Chapter | 1  The Neuroanatomical Organization of the Basal Ganglia

the ­projections to the striatum such that more medially situated neurons project ventrally to the nucleus accumbens and
ventral striatum, whereas more lateral and caudal neurons,
in the A9 and A8 cell groups, project to the dorsal striatum.
The ventral tier set provides inputs preferentially to the
striatal patch compartment. Neurons in this set are situated
in the ventral part of the substantia nigra pars compacta and
in groups of cells embedded in the pars reticulata (Fig. 1.9).
In contrast to dorsal tier neurons, ventral tier pars compacta
neurons are distinguished by their extension of dendrites
ventrally into the pars reticulata. Ventral tier dopamine
neurons do not display calbindin immunoreactivity. These
neurons display a topographic organization in their projections to the striatum, with dorsally positioned neurons
projecting to the patch compartment in the ventral striatum
and nucleus accumbens, and ventrally positioned neurons
in the pars reticulata projecting to the dorsal striatal patch
compartment.
It is worthwhile to note that the numbers of dopamine
neurons located in the ventral substantia nigra pars reti­
culata increases at more caudal levels. Consequently, the
common view of the substantia nigra as being composed of
two separate zones, a dorsal pars compacta in which dopamine neurons are located, and a ventral pars reticulata in
which GABA neurons are located, applies only to the rostral most levels of this nucleus. This organization appears
to be common across species from rat to primates.

B.  Inputs to Dopamine Neurons
Input to pars compacta dopamine neurons appears to be,
for the most part, similar to that to the pars reticulata for
each of the sources of input described above (see also
Chapter 16). Afferents from the striatum, which are identified both directly with anterograde axonal markers, and
with GABA or substance P immunoreactivity, appear to
provide a major input to pars compacta neurons (Smith
and Bolam, 1990). However, in the case of afferents from
the globus pallidus the input is somewhat less than that to
the pars reticulata neurons (Smith and Bolam, 1990). In
addition, there are other known sources of inputs directed
to the pars compacta that have not been described as being
directed to the pars reticulata. One of these is a cholinergic input that provides asymmetric synaptic contacts with
pars compacta neurons, which at least in part arises in the
pedunculopontine nucleus (see Chapter 23). Another is
from the amygdala, which appears to provide inputs to the
major components of the dopamine cell groups, but not to

21

the pars reticulata (Gonzales and Chesselet, 1990). In addition, the lateral habenula provides input directed to the pars
compacta (Herkenham and Nauta, 1979), which has been
identified with electrophysiologic techniques as an inhibitory input (Christoph et al., 1986).

VIII.  Striatal patch-matrix
compartments
A.  Markers Defining the Patch-Matrix
Compartments
As mentioned above, early indication that there are compartments within the striatum came from studies that observed
islands or patches of dopamine innervation distributed within
the neuropil of the striatum during early postnatal development; this uneven innervation gives way to a homogeneous
distribution of dopamine input as development progresses
(Tennyson et al., 1972). A number of neurochemical
markers were then found to coincide with these patches,
including staining for acetylcholinesterase (Graybiel and
Ragsdale, 1978) and opiate receptor binding (Herkenham
and Pert, 1981). The striatal neurons that are the target of
this early dopamine input also develop first, with later born
striatal neurons filling in the surrounding matrix regions of
the striatum (van der Kooy and Fishell, 1987). These two
developmental compartments, the early developing patches
or islands and the later developing matrix, give rise to the
adult patch (or striosome; Graybiel and Ragsdale, 1978)
and matrix compartments of the striatum. As the adult striatum appears homogeneous neurochemical markers can still
reveal these compartments; notably, among others, calbindin marks the matrix (Gerfen et al., 1985) and mu opioid
receptors mark the patch compartment (Herkenham and
Pert, 1981; see Fig. 20.3 in Chapter 20).

B.  Dopamine Inputs to Patches Versus Matrix
As discussed in the previous Section, distinct subsets of
dopamine neurons differentially target the striatal patch and
matrix compartments (Gerfen et al., 1987a,b). Axonal tracing
studies demonstrated that dopamine neuron projections from
the ventral tegmental area, dorsal tier of the substantia nigra
pars compacta and retrorubral area provide input principally
to the striatal matrix compartment, whereas projections
from the two groups of ventral tier dopamine neurons of
the substantia nigra provide input to the patch compartment
(Gerfen et al., 1987a). Moreover, as mentioned above, the

22

matrix-projecting neurons co-express the calcium-binding
protein calbindin, which thus provides a neurochemical
marker for these neurons (Gerfen et al., 1985).
To further affirm this differential organization, we took
advantage of the differential development of the patch- and
matrix-directed dopamine systems. Injecting the neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine into the striatum on the day of
birth resulted in the selective degeneration of the ventral tier
dopamine neurons and the dopamine input to the patch compartment (Gerfen et al., 1987b), as these neurons are already
present at birth and thus were destroyed by the neurotoxin.
In contrast, the calbindin-expressing dopamine neurons
in the ventral tegmental area, dorsal tier of the pars compacta and retrorubral area, which only develop postnatally,
survived in adults, as did the dopamine input to the striatal
matrix compartment. These findings thus confirmed that distinct sets of mesostriatal dopamine neurons differerentially
target the patch and matrix compartments of the striatum.
Such distinct sets of dopamine neurons providing differential input to the striatal patch and matrix compartments have also been demonstrated in the cat and the
primate (Gerfen et al., 1985; Jimenez-Castellanos and
Graybiel, 1987; Langer and Graybiel, 1989). However, this
differential innervation is not absolute. A recent study in
the rat by Matsuda et al. (2009) used a method that labels
the full axonal arborization of single neurons and found
that individual dopamine neurons in both the dorsal and
ventral tier distribute axons to some degree to both patch
and matrix compartments, although each neuron’s arborization tended to favor one or the other. The potential significance of this finding is discussed below.

Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function

Corticostriatal projections predominantly arise from
pyramidal neurons in layer 5. Early studies examining the
compartmental targets of corticostriatal projections suggested that different cortical areas projected selectively
to one or the other. Limbic cortical areas were shown to
provide input to the patch compartment, whereas somatosensory and motor cortical area projections targeted the
matrix (Gerfen, 1984; Donoghue and Herkenham, 1986).
However, more detailed analysis of corticostriatal projections demonstrated that most cortical areas provide inputs
to both compartments, but that neurons in different sublayers of layer 5 differentially project to the patch and matrix
compartments (Gerfen, 1989). For each specific cortical
area, neurons with patch-directed inputs are located in
deep layer 5, whereas those with matrix-directed inputs are
located in superficial layer 5 (Fig. 1.10).

Cortex
(layer 5)

Striatum

Striatal patch-matrix
compartment connections

Patch
output

C.  Cortical and Thalamic Inputs
Dopamine input to striatal medium spiny neurons is
directed principally to dendritic shafts and spine necks,
and likely functions to modulate excitatory input that
is directed to the dendritic spines. There are two main
sources of glutamatergic excitatory input, the cerebral cortex and the thalamus, and some aspects of each of these
is organized relative to patch and matrix compartments.
For the thalamus, parts of the intralaminar thalamic nuclei
differentially target the patch-matrix compartments, with
projections of the parafascicular and centromedian nuclei
directed to the matrix, and projections of the paraventricular nucleus directed to the patch compartment (Herkenham
and Pert, 1981; Gerfen et al., 1982; Berendse et al., 1988).

Matrix
output

SNc SNr

Substantia
nigra
1 mm

Figure 1.10  Connections of the striatal patch–matrix compartments.
The organization of the patch-matrix compartments bestows parallel pathways from the cerebral cortex through the striatum that provide
differential input to the dopamine and GABA neurons in the substantia
nigra. Deep layer 5 corticostriatal neurons project to the patch compartment, whose neurons target dopamine neurons in the substantia nigra
pars compacta (SNc). Superficial layer 5 corticostriatal neurons provide
inputs to the matrix compartment, whose neurons project to the substantia
nigra pars reticulata (SNr), which contains the GABA output neurons of
the basal ganglia. This organization arises from most neocortical areas,
although there is a gradient such that those areas closer to the allocortex
provide a greater input to the patch compartment, whereas primary sensorimotor areas provide a greater input to the matrix compartment.

Chapter | 1  The Neuroanatomical Organization of the Basal Ganglia

Corticostriatal projections are topographically organized, such that motor cortical areas project to the dorsolateral striatum and prelimbic and infralimbic areas project to
the medial and ventral striatum. Importantly, for each cortical area, both patch- and matrix-directed projections target
the topographic region within the striatum, such that from a
given cortical area, its projections to the matrix surround the
patches that it also projects to. While this pattern of organization of corticostriatal projections is apparent in most cortical areas, the relative contribution of inputs to the patch
and matrix compartments varies between cortical areas.
Neocortical areas, such as motor, supplementary motor and
somatosensory cortices, provide greater inputs to the matrix
compartment, whereas allocortical and peri-allocortical
areas such as the prelimbic and infralimbic cortical areas
provide greater inputs to the patch compartment. This transition of a predominance of patch-directed inputs from
limbic-related cortical areas to matrix-directed inputs from
neocortical areas is likely responsible for the earlier findings, suggesting that different cortical areas provide inputs
only to one compartment. The major significance of the
organization of corticostriatal projections is that the striatal
patch and matrix compartments are related to the laminar
organization of the cerebral cortex rather than to tangential
or columnar features of its organization (Gerfen, 1989).

23

with the dopamine neurons that provide patch input, but
rather affects dopamine feedback to both compartments.
The target of the output of striatal matrix neurons is
directed to components of the basal ganglia that provide
the output of this system. These are the internal segment
of the globus pallidus and substantia nigra pars reticulata
which are composed of GABA neurons that project to the
thalamus, superior colliculus and other midbrain systems
connected with motor control (see above). Thus, the output of neurons in the striatal patch and matrix, respectively,
target dopamine feedback to the striatum and basal ganglia
output systems. In summary, the general organization of
the patch-matrix compartments provides separate pathways
from the cortex, through the striatum, to differentially modulate dopamine and other basal ganglia feedback circuits,
or to affect basal ganglia GABAergic output neurons in
the internal segment of the globus pallidus and substantia
nigra pars reticulata (Fig. 1.10). Thus, the cortical connections through the patch compartment appear to be related
to regulation of the dopamine, and possibly serotonin,
feedback systems to the striatum, whereas cortical connections through the matrix compartment appear to be related
to regulation of the output neurons of the basal ganglia.

References
D.  Outputs of Patches Versus Matrix
In addition to inputs, output connections of the striatum are
also organized relative to the patch-matrix compartments
(Fig. 1.10). The distribution of medium spiny neurons is
homogeneous and does not reveal striatal compartments,
the dendrites of the neurons in patch and matrix compartments tend to remain confined within their respective compartments (Gerfen, 1985; Bolam et al., 1988). Moreover,
axonal tracing studies demonstrated that projections from
the striatal patch compartment provide input directed principally to the ventral tier dopamine neurons in the substantia nigra, whereas the striatal matrix neurons project to the
external and internal segment of the globus pallidus, and
substantia nigra pars reticulata (Gerfen, 1985) (Fig. 1.10).
Thus, the striatal output of the patch compartment is
directed principally at the same ventral tier dopamine
neurons that provide input to this compartment. In this
regard, the recent finding that ventral tier neurons provide
dopamine input to both patch and matrix compartments
(Matsuda et al., 2009) is important. This finding suggests
that the striatal patch output is not part of a closed loop

Albin RL, Young AB, Penney JB (1989) The functional anatomy of basal
ganglia disorders. Trends Neurosci 12:366–375.
Alexander GE, DeLong MR, Strick PL (1986) Parallel organization of
functionally segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and cortex.
Annu Rev Neurosci 9:357–381.
Arluison M, Dietl M, Thibault J (1984) Ultrastructural morphology of
dopaminergic nerve terminals and synapses in the striatum of the rat
using tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactivity: a topographical study.
Brain Res Bull 13:269–285.
Beckstead RM (1979) An autoradiographic examination of corticocortical
and subcortical projections of the mediodorsal-projection (prefrontal)
cortex in the rat. J Comp Neurol 184:43–62.
Beckstead RM (1983) A pallidostriatal projection in the cat and monkey.
Brain Res Bull 11:629–632.
Beckstead RM (1988) Association of dopamine D1 and D2 receptors
with specific cellular elements in the basal ganglia of the cat: the
uneven topography of dopamine receptors in the striatum is determined by intrinsic striatal cells, not nigrostriatal axons. Neuroscience
27:851–863.
Beckstead RM, Cruz CJ (1986) Striatal axons to the globus pallidus,
entopeduncular nucleus and substantia nigra come mainly from separate cell populations in cat. Neuroscience 19:147–158.
Beckstead RM, Kersey KS (1985) Immunohistochemical demonstration
of differential substance P-, met-enkephalin-, and glutamic-aciddecarboxylase-containing cell body and axon distributions in the corpus striatum of the cat. J Comp Neurol 232:481–498.

24

Berendse HW, Voorn P, te Kortschot A, Groenewegen HJ (1988) Nuclear
origin of thalamic afferents of the ventral striatum determines their
relation to patch/matrix configurations in enkephalin-immunoreactivity
in the rat. J Chem Neuroanat 1:3–10.
Bevan MD, Booth PAC, Eaton SA, Bolam JP (1998) Selective innervation of neostriatal interneurons by a sub-class of neuron in the globus
pallidus of the rat. J Neurosci 18:9438–9452.
Bishop GA, Chang HT, Kitai ST (1982) Morphological and physiological
properties of neostriatal neurons: an intracellular horseradish peroxidase study in the rat.. Neuroscience 7:179–191.
Bjorklund A, Lindvall O (1984) Dopamine-containing systems in the
CNS. In Handbook of Chemical Neuroanatomy Vol. 2: Classical
Transmitters in the CNS, Part I (Bjorklund A, Hokfelt T, eds), pp.
55–122: Elsevier. Amsterdam.
Bolam JP, Clarke DJ, Smith AD, Somogyi P (1983) A type of aspiny
neuron in the rat neostriatum accumulates [3H]gamma-aminobutyric
acid: combination of Golgi-staining, autoradiography, and electron
microscopy. J Comp Neurol 213:121–134.
Bolam JP, Ingham CA, Izzo PN, Levey AI, Rye DB, Smith AD, Wainer
BH (1986) Substance P-containing terminals in synaptic contact with
cholinergic neurons in the neostriatum and basal forebrain: a double
immunocytochemical study in the rat. Brain Res 397:279–289.
Bolam JP, Izzo PN (1988) The postsynaptic targets of substance Pimmuno­reactive terminals in the rat neostriatum with particular
reference to identified spiny striatonigral neurons. Exp Brain Res
70:361–377.
Bolam JP, Izzo PN, Graybiel AM (1988) Cellular substrate of the histochemically defined striosome/matrix system of the caudate nucleus:
a combined Golgi and immunocytochemical study in cat and ferret..
Neuroscience 24:853–875.
Bolam JP, Powell JF, Wu JY, Smith AD (1985) Glutamate decarboxylaseimmunoreactive structures in the rat neostriatum: a correlated light
and electron microscopic study including a combination of Golgi
impregnation with immunocytochemistry. J Comp Neurol 237:1–20.
Bolam JP, Wainer BH, Smith AD (1984) Characterization of cholinergic
neurons in the rat neostriatum. A combination of choline acetyltransferase immunocytochemistry, Golgi-impregnation and electron
microscopy. Neuroscience 12:711–718.
Bouyer JJ, Park DH, Joh TH, Pickel VM (1984) Chemical and structural
analysis of the relation between cortical inputs and tyrosine ­hydroxylasecontaining terminals in rat neostriatum. Brain Res 302:267–275.
Carman JB, Cowan WM, Powell TPS (1965) The organization of corticostriate connexions in the rabbit. Brain 86:525–562.
Chang HT, Wilson CJ, Kitai ST (1981) Single neostriatal efferent axons
in the globus pallidus: a light and electron microscopic study. Science
213:915–918.
Chang HT, Wilson CJ, Kitai ST (1982) A Golgi study of rat neostriatal
neurons: light microscopic analysis. J Comp Neurol 208:107–126.
Chesselet MF, Robbins E (1989) Characterization of striatal neurons
expressing high levels of glutamic acid decarboxylase messenger
RNA. Brain Res 492:237–244.
Chevalier G, Vacher S, Deniau JM, Desban M (1985) Disinhibition as a
basic process in the expression of striatal functions. I. The striatonigral influence on tecto-spinal/tecto-diencephalic neurons. Brain Res
334:215–226.
Christoph GR, Leonzio RJ, Wilcox KS (1986) Stimulation of the lateral
habenula inhibits dopamine-containing neurons in the substantia
nigra and ventral tegmental area of the rat. J Neurosci 6:613–619.

Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function

Cowan RL, Wilson CJ, Emson PC, Heizmann CW (1990) Parvalbumincontaining GABAergic interneurons in the rat neostriatum. J Comp
Neurol 302:197–205.
Cowan RL, Wilson CJ (1994) Spontaneous firing patterns and axonal projections of single corticostriatal neurons in the rat medial agranular
cortex. J Neurophysiol 71:17–32.
Dawson TM, Bredt DS, Fotuhi M, Hwang PM, Snyder SH (1991) Nitric
oxide synthase and neuronal NADPH diaphorase are identical in
brain and peripheral tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:7797–7801.
DeLong MR (1990) Primate models of movement disorders of basal ganglia origin. Trends Neurosci 13:281–285.
Deniau JM, Chevalier G (1985) Disinhibition as a basic process in the
expression of striatal functions. II. The striato-nigral influence on
thalamocortical cells of the ventromedial thalamic nucleus. Brain Res
334:227–233.
Deniau JM, Chevalier G (1992) The lamellar organization of the rat
substantia nigra pars reticulata: distribution of projection neurons.
Neuroscience 46:361–377.
Deniau JM, Feger J, LeGuyader C (1976) Striatal evoked inhibition of
identified nigro-thalamic neurons. Brain Res 104:152–156.
DiFiglia M, Pasik P, Pasik T (1976) A Golgi study of neuronal types in
the neostriatum of monkeys. Brain Res 114:245–256.
DiFiglia M, Pasik P, Pasik T (1982) A Golgi and ultrastructural study of
the monkey globus pallidus. J Comp Neurol 212:53–75.
Donoghue JP, Herkenham M (1986) Neostriatal projections from individual cortical fields conform to histochemically distinct striatal compartments in the rat. Brain Res 365:397–403.
Donoghue JP, Kitai ST (1981) A collateral pathway to the neostriatum
from corticofugal neurons of the rat sensory-motor cortex: an intracellular HRP study. J Comp Neurol 210:1–13.
Dube L, Smith AD, Bolam JP (1988) Identification of synaptic terminals
of thalamic or cortical origin in contact with distinct medium-size
spiny neurons in the rat neostriatum. J Comp Neurol 267:455–471.
Elde R, Schalling M, Ceddatelli S, Nakanishi S, Hokfelt T (1990)
Localization of neuropeptide receptor mRNA in rat brain: initial
observations using probes for neurotensin and substance P receptors.
Neuroscience Lett 120:134–138.
Fibiger HC (1982) The organization and some projections of cholinergic
neurons of the mammalian forebrain. Brain Res Rev 4:327–338.
Flaherty AW, Graybiel AM (1991) Corticostriatal transformations
in the primate somatosensory system. Projections from physiologically mapped body-part representations. J Neurophysiol 66:
1249–1263.
Flaherty AW, Graybiel AM (1993) Two input systems for body representations in the primate striatal matrix: experimental evidence in the
squirrel monkey. J Neurosci 13:1120–1137.
Freund TF, Powell JF, Smith AD (1984) Tyrosine hydroxylaseimmunoreactive boutons in synaptic contact with identified striatonigral neurons, with particular reference to dendritic spines.
Neuroscience 13:1189–1215.
Gerfen CR (1984) The neostriatal mosaic: compartmentalization
of corticostriatal input and striatonigral output systems. Nature
311:461–464.
Gerfen CR (1985) The neostriatal mosaic. I. Compartmental organization of projections from the striatum to the substantia nigra in the rat.
J Comp Neurol 236:454–476.
Gerfen CR (1989) The neostriatal mosaic: striatal patch-matrix organization is related to cortical lamination. Science 246:385–388.

Chapter | 1  The Neuroanatomical Organization of the Basal Ganglia

Gerfen CR (1991) Substance P (neurokinin-1) receptor mRNA is selectively expressed in cholinergic neurons in the striatum and basal forebrain. Brain Res 556:165–170.
Gerfen CR (1992) The neostriatal mosaic: multiple levels of compartmental organization. Trends Neurosci 15:133–139.
Gerfen CR, Baimbridge KG, Miller JJ (1985) The neostriatal mosaic:
compartmental distribution of calcium-binding protein and parvalbumin in the basal ganglia of the rat and monkey. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 82:8780–8784.
Gerfen CR, Baimbridge KG, Thibault J (1987a) The neostriatal mosaic:
III. Biochemical and developmental dissociation of patch-matrix
mesostriatal systems. J Neurosci 7:3935–3944.
Gerfen CR, Engber TM, Mahan LC, Susel Z, Chase TN, Monsma FJ,
Sibley DR (1990) D1 and D2 dopamine receptor-regulated gene
expression of striatonigral and striatopallidal neurons. Science
250:1429–1432.
Gerfen CR, Herkenham M, Thibault J (1987b) The neostriatal mosaic:
II. Patch- and matrix-directed mesostriatal dopaminergic and nondopaminergic systems. J Neurosci 7:3915–3934.
Gerfen CR, McGinty JF, Young WS (1991) Dopamine differentially
regulates dynorphin, substance P, and enkephalin expression in striatal neurons: in situ hybridization histochemical analysis. J Neurosci
11:1016–1031.
Gerfen CR, Keefe KA, Gauda EB (1995) D1 and D2 dopamine receptor function in the striatum: coactivation of D1 and D2 dopamine
receptors on separate populations of neurons results in potentiated
immediate-early gene response in D1-containing neurons. J Neurosci
15:8167–8176.
Gerfen CR, Staines WA, Arbuthnott GW, Fibiger HC (1982) Crossed
connections of the substantia nigra in the rat. J Comp Neurol
207:283–303.
Gerfen CR, Young WS (1988) Distribution of striatonigral and striatopallidal peptidergic neurons in both patch and matrix compartments: an
in situ hybridization histochemistry and fluorescent retrograde tracing
study. Brain Res 460:161–167.
Gerfen CR, Miyachi S, Paletzki R, Brown P (2002) D1 dopamine receptor supersensitivity in the dopamine-depleted striatum results from
a switch in the regulation of ERK1/2/MAP kinase. J Neurosci
22:5042–5054.
Gong S, Zheng C, Doughty ML, Losos K, Didkovsky N, Schambra UB,
Nowak NJ, Joyner A, Leblanc G, Hatten ME, Heintz N (2003) A
gene expression atlas of the central nervous system based on bacterial artificial chromosomes. Nature 425:917–925.
Gong S, Doughty ML, Harbaugh CR, Cummins A, Hatten ME, Heintz N,
Gerfen CR (2007) Targeting Cre recombinase to specific neuron populations with bacterial artificial chromosome constructs. J Neurosci
27:9817–9823.
Gonzales C, Chesselet MF (1990) Amygdalonigral pathway: an anterograde study in the rat with Phaseolus vulgaris leucoagglutinin
(PHA-L). J Comp Neurol 297:182–200.
Graybiel AM, Ragsdale CW Jr (1978) Histochemically distinct compartments in the striatum of human, monkey and cat demonstrated by acetylcholinesterase staining. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 75:5723–5726.
Graybiel AM, Chesselet MF (1984) Compartmental distribution of striatal
cell bodies expressing [Met]enkephalin-like immunoreactivity. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 81:7980–7984.
Graybiel AM, Moratalla R, Robertson HA (1990) Amphetamine
and cocaine induce drug-specific activation of the c-fos gene in

25

striosome-matrix compartments and limbic subdivisions of the striatum. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:6912–6916.
Graybiel AM, Ragsdale CJ, Yoneoka ES, Elde RP (1981) An immunohistochemical study of enkephalins and other neuropeptides in the
striatum of the cat with evidence that the opiate peptides are arranged
to form mosaic patterns in register with the striosomal compartments
visible by acetylcholinesterase staining. Neuroscience 6:377–397.
Groenewegen HJ (1988) Organization of the afferent connections of the
mediodorsal thalamic nucleus in the rat, related to the mediodorsalprefrontal topography. Neuroscience 24:379–431.
Groenewegen HJ, Berendse HW, Haber SN (1993) Organization of the
output of the ventral striatopallidal system in the rat: ventral pallidal
efferents. Neuroscience 57:113–142.
Groenewegen HJ, Russchen FT (1984) Organization of the efferent projections of the nucleus accumbens to pallidal, hypothalamic, and
mesencephalic structures: a tracing and immunohistochemical study
in the cat. J Comp Neurol 223:347–367.
Grofova I (1975) The identification of striatal and pallidal neurons projecting to substantia nigra. An experimental study by means of retrograde axonal transport of horseradish peroxidase. Brain Res
91:286–291.
Grofová I (1979) Types of striatonigral neurons labeled by retrograde
transport of horseradish peroxidase. Appl Neurophysiol 42:25–28.
Grofova I, Deniau JM, Kitai ST (1982) Morphology of the substantia
nigra pars reticulata projection neurons intracellularly labeled with
HRP. J Comp Neurol 208:352–368.
Grove EA, Domesick VB, Nauta WJH (1986) Light microscopic evidence
of striatal input to intrapallidal neurons of cholinergic cell group Ch4
in the rat: a study employing the anterograde tracer Phaseolus vulgaris leucagglutinin (PHA-L). Brain Res 367:379–384.
Haber SN, Watson SJ (1983) The comparison between enkephalin-like
and dynorphin-like immunoreactivity in both monkey and human
globus pallidus and substantia nigra. Life Sci 1:33–36.
Haber SN, Groenewegen HJ, Grove EA, Nauta WJ (1985) Efferent connections of the ventral pallidum: evidence of a dual striato pallidofugal pathway. J Comp Neurol 235:322–335.
Haber SN, Lynd BE, Mitchell SJ (1993) The organization of the descending ventral pallidal projections in the monkey. J Comp Neurol
329:111–128.
Hanson GR, Alphs L, Pradham S, Lovenberg W (1981) Haloperidolinduced reduction of nigral substance P-like immunoreactivity: a
probe for the interactions between dopamine and substance P neuronal systems. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 218:568–574.
Hanson GR, Merchant KM, Letter AA, Bush L, Gibb JW (1987)
Methamphetamine-induced changes in the striato-nigral dynorphin system: role of D-1 and D-2 receptors. Eur J Pharmacol
144:245–246.
Hattori T, McGeer EG, McGeer PL (1978) Fine structural analysis of cortico-striatal pathway. J Comp Neurol 185:347–354.
Hedreen JC, DeLong MR (1991) Organization of striatopallidal, striatonigral, and nigrostriatal projections in the macaque. J Comp Neurol
304:569–595.
Herkenham M, Lynn AB, Johnson MR, Melvin LS, Costa BR, Rice K
(1991) Characterization and localization of cannabinoid receptors in
rat brain: a quantitative in vitro autoradiographic study. J Neurosci
11:563–583.
Herkenham M, Nauta WJH (1979) Efferent connections of the habenular
nuclei in the rat. J Comp Neurol 187:19–48.

26

Herkenham M, Pert CB (1981) Mosaic distribution of opiate receptors,
parafascicular projections and acetylcholinesterase in rat striatum.
Nature 291:415–418.
Hersch SM, Ciliax BJ, Gutekunst CA, Rees HD, Heilman CJ, Yung KK,
Bolam JP, Ince E, Yi H, Levey AI (1995) Electron microscopic analysis of D1 and D2 dopamine receptor proteins in the dorsal striatum
and their synaptic relationships with motor corticostriatal afferents.
J Neurosci 15:5222–5237.
Ilinsky IA, Jouandet ML, Goldman-Rakic PS (1985) Organization of the
nigrothalamocortical system in the rhesus monkey. J Comp Neurol
236:315–330.
Ingham CA, Bolam JP, Smith AD (1988) GABA-immunoreactive synaptic boutons in the rat basal forebrain: comparison of neurons that
project to the neocortex with pallidosubthalamic neurons. J Comp
Neurol 273:263–282.
Ingham CA, Bolam JP, Wainer BH, Smith AD (1985) A correlated light
and electron microscopic study of identified cholinergic basal forebrain neurons that project to the cortex in the rat. J Comp Neurol
239:176–192.
Izzo PN, Bolam JP (1988) Cholinergic synaptic input to different parts of
spiny striatonigral neurons in the rat. J Comp Neurol 269:219–234.
Jimenez-Castellanos J, Graybiel AM (1987) Subdivisions of the
dopamine-containing A8-A9-A10 complex identified by their differential mesostriatal innervation of striosomes and extrastriosomal
matrix. Neuroscience 23:223–242.
Kawaguchi Y (1992) Large aspiny cells in the matrix of the rat neostriatum in vitro: physiological identification, relation to the compartments
and excitatory postsynaptic currents. J Neurophysiol 67:1669–1682.
Kawaguchi Y (1993) Physiological, morphological, and histochemical
characterization of three classes of interneurons in rat neostriatum.
J Neurosci 13:4908–4923.
Kawaguchi Y, Kubota Y (1993) Correlation of physiological
subgroupings of nonpyramidal cells with parvalbumin- and
calbindinD28k-immunoreactive neurons in layer V of rat frontal
cortex. J Neurophysiol 70:387–396.
Kawaguchi Y, Wilson CJ, Emson PC (1989) Intracellular recording of
identified neostriatal patch and matrix spiny cells in a slice preparation preserving cortical inputs. J Neurophysiol 62:1052–1068.
Kawaguchi Y, Wilson CJ, Emson PC (1990) Projection subtypes of rat
neostriatal matrix cells revealed by intracellular injection of biocytin.
J Neurosci 10:3421–3438.
Kawaguchi Y, Wilson CJ, Augood SJ, Emson PC (1995) Striatal interneurones: chemical, physiological and morphological characterization.
Trends Neurosci 18:527–535.
Kemp JM, Powell TPS (1970) The cortico-striate projection in the monkey. Brain 93:525–546.
Kemp JM, Powell TPS (1971) The structure of the caudate nucleus of the
cat: Light and electron microscopic study. Phil Trans R Soc Lond
[Biol] 262:383–401.
Kincaid AE, Zheng T, Wilson CJ (1998) Connectivity and convergence of
single corticostriatal axons. J Neurosci 18:4722–4731.
Kita H (1993) GABAergic circuits of the striatum. Prog Brain Res
99:51–72.
Kita H, Kitai ST (1987) Efferent projections of the subthalamic nucleus
in the rat: light and electron microscopic analysis with the PHA-L
method. J Comp Neurol 260:435–452.
Kita H, Kitai ST (1988) Glutamate decarboxylase immunoreactive neurons in rat neostriatum: their morphological types and populations.
Brain Res 447:346–352.

Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function

Kita H, Kitai ST (1991) Intracellular study of rat globus pallidus neurons:
membrane properties and responses to neostriatal, subthalamic and
nigral stimulation. Brain Res 564:296–305.
Kita H, Kitai ST (1994a) Parvalbuminin-immunoreactive neurons in rat
globus pallidus: a light and electron microscopic study. Brain Res
657:31–41.
Kita H, Kitai ST (1994b) The morphology of globus pallidus projection neurons in the rat: an intracellular staining study. Brain Res
636:308–319.
Kita H, Chang HT, Kitai ST (1983a) The morphology of intracellularly
labeled rat subthalamic neurons: a light microscopic analysis. J Comp
Neurol 215:245–257.
Kita H, Chang HT, Kitai ST (1983b) Pallidal inputs to subthalamus: intracellular analysis. Brain Res 264:255–265.
Kita H, Kosaka T, Heizmann CW (1990) Parvalbumin-immunoreactive
neurons in the rat neostriatum: a light and electron microscopic study.
Brain Res 536:1–15.
Kitai ST, Koscis JD, Preston RJ, Sugimori M (1976) Monosynaptic inputs
to caudate neurons identified by intracellular injection of horseradish
peroxidase. Brain Res 109:601–606.
Kubota Y, Kawaguchi Y (1993) Spatial distributions of chemically identified intrinsic neurons in relation to patch and matrix compartments of
rat neostriatum. J Comp Neurol 332:499–513.
Kubota Y, Mikawa S, Kawaguchi Y (1993) Neostriatal GABAergic
interneurones contain NOS, calretinin or parvalbumin. Neuroreport
5:205–208.
Kunzle H (1975) Bilateral projections from precentral motor cortex to the
putamen and other parts of the basal ganglia. An autoradiographic
study in Macaca fascicularis. Brain Res 88:195–209.
Lacey CJ, Boyes J, Gerlach O, Chen L, Magill PJ, Bolam JP (2005)
GABA-B receptors at glutamatergic synapses in the rat striatum.
Neuroscience 136:1083–1095.
Lacey CJ, Bolam JP, Magill PJ (2007) Novel and distinct operational
principles of intralaminar thalamic neurons and their striatal projections. J Neurosci 27:4374–4384.
Landry P, Wilson CJ, Kitai ST (1984) Morphological and electrophysiological characteristics of pyramidal tract neurons in the rat. Exp Brain
Res 57:177–190.
Langer LF, Graybiel AM (1989) Distinct nigrostriatal projection systems
innervate striosomes and matrix in the primate striatum. Brain Res
498:344–350.
Lei W, Jiao Y, Del Mar N, Reiner A (2004) Evidence for differential cortical input to direct pathway versus indirect pathway striatal projection
neurons in rats. J Neurosci 24:8289–8299.
Le Moine C, Bloch B (1995) D1 and D2 dopamine receptor gene
expression in the rat striatum: sensitive cRNA probes demonstrate
prominent segregation of D1 and D2 mRNAs in distinct neuronal populations of the dorsal and ventral striatum. J Comp Neurol
355:418–426.
Le Moine C, Normand E, Bloch B (1991) Phenotypical characterization
of the rat striatal neurons expressing the D1 dopamine receptor gene.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:4205–4209.
Le Moine C, Normand E, Guitteny AF, Fouque B, Teoule R, Bloch B
(1990) Dopamine receptor gene expression by enkephalin neurons in
rat forebrain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:230–234.
Loopuijt LD, van der Kooy D (1985) Organization of the striatum: collateralization of its efferent axons. Brain Res 348:86–99.
Matsuda W, Furuta T, Nakamura KC, Hioki H, Fujiyama F, Arai R,
Kaneko T (2009) Single nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons form

Chapter | 1  The Neuroanatomical Organization of the Basal Ganglia

widely spread and highly dense axonal arborizations in the neostriatum. J Neurosci 29:444–453.
Mogenson GJ, Ciriello J, Garland J, Wu M (1987) Ventral pallidum projections to mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus: an anatomical and
electrophysiological investigation in the rat. Brain Res 404:221–230.
Moss J, Bolam JP (2008) A dopaminergic axon lattice in the striatum
and its relationship with cortical and thalamic terminals. J Neurosci
28:11221–11230.
Nakanishi H, Kita H, Kitai ST (1987a) Electrical membrane properties
of rat subthalamic neurons in an in vitro slice preparation. Brain Res
437:35–44.
Nakanishi H, Kita H, Kitai ST (1987b) Intracellular study of rat substantia
nigra pars reticulata neurons in an in vitro slice preparation: electrical membrane properties and response characteristics to subthalamic
stimulation. Brain Res 437:45–55.
Nakanishi H, Kita H, Kitai ST (1988) An N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor mediated excitatory postsynaptic potential evoked in subthalamic
neurons in an in vitro slice preparation of the rat. Neurosci Lett
95:130–136.
Nauta WJH, Mehler WR (1966) Projections of the lentiform nucleus in
the monkey. Brain Res 1:3–42.
Oertel WH, Mugnaini E (1984) Immunocytochemical studies of
GABAergic neurons in rat basal ganglia and their relations to other
neuronal systems. Neurosci Lett 47:233–238.
Olson L, Seiger A, Fuxe K (1972) Heterogeneity of striatal and limbic
dopamine innervation: highly fluorescent islands in developing and
adult rats. Brain Res 44:283–288.
Oorschot DE (1996) Total number of neurons in the neostriatal, pallidal,
subthalamic, and substantia nigral nuclei of the rat basal ganglia: A
stereological study using the Cavalieri and optical dissector methods.
J Comp Neurol 366:580–599.
Parent A, Hazrati L-N (1994) Multiple striatal representation in primate
substantia nigra. J Comp Neurol 344:305–320.
Park MR, Falls WM, Kitai ST (1982) An intracellular HRP study of the
rat globus pallidus. I. Responses and light microscopic analysis.
J Comp Neurol 211:284–294.
Parthasarathy HB, Schall JD, Graybiel AM (1992) Distributed but convergent ordering of corticostriatal projections: analysis of the frontal eye field and the supplementary eye field in the macaque monkey.
J Neurosci 12:4468–4488.
Pasik P, Pasik T, Holstein GR, Hámori J (1988) GABAergic elements
in the neuronal circuits of the monkey neostriatum: a light and
electron microscopic immunocytochemical study. J Comp Neurol
270:157–170.
Penney GR, Wilson CJ, Kitai ST (1988) Relationship of the axonal and
dendritic geometry of spiny projection neurons to the compartmental
organization of the neostriatum. J Comp Neurol 269:275–289.
Plenz D, Kitai ST (1999) A basal ganglia pacemaker formed by the subthalamic nucleus and external globus pallidus. Nature 400:677–682.
Raju DV, Ahern TH, Shah DJ, Wright TM, Standaert DG, Hall RA, Smith Y
(2008) Differential synaptic plasticity of the corticostriatal and
thalamostriatal systems in an MPTP-treated monkey model of parkinsonism. Eur J Neurosci 27:1647–1658.
Redgrave P, Marrow L, Dean P (1992) Topographical organization of
the nigrotectal projection in rat: evidence for segregated channels.
Neuroscience 50:571–595.
Ribak CE, Vaughn JE, Roberts E (1979) The GABA neurons and their
axon terminals in rat corpus striatum as demonstrated by GAD immunocytochemistry. J Comp Neurol 187:261–284.

27

Richfield EK, Penney JB, Young AB (1989) Anatomical and affinity state
comparisons between dopamine D1 and D2 receptors in the rat central nervous system. Neuroscience 30:767–777.
Robeldo P, Féger J (1990) Excitatory influence of rat subthalamic nucleus
to substantia nigra pars reticulata and the pallidal complex: electrophysiological data. Brain Res 518:47–54.
Saper CB (1984) Organization of cerebral cortical afferent systems in the
rat. II. Magnocellular basal nucleus. J Comp Neurol 222:313–342.
Selemon LD, Goldman-Rakic PS (1985) Longitudinal topography and
interdigitation of corticostriatal projections in the rhesus monkey.
J Neurosci 5:776–794.
Schell GR, Strick PL (1984) The origin of thalamic inputs to the arcuate
premotor and supplementary motor areas. J Neurosci 4:539–560.
Smith Y, Bolam JP (1989) Neurons of the substantia nigra reticulata
receive a dense GABA-containing input from the globus pallidus in
the rat. Brain Res 493:160–167.
Smith Y, Bolam JP (1990) The output neurones and the dopaminergic
neurones of the substantia nigra receive a GABA-containing input
from the globus pallidus in the rat. J Comp Neurol 296:47–64.
Smith Y, Bolam JP (1991) Convergence of synaptic inputs from the striatum and the globus pallidus onto identified nigrocollicular cells in the
rat: a double anterograde labelling study. Neuroscience 44:45–73.
Smith Y, Bolam JP, vonKrosigk M (1990) Topographical and synaptic
organization of the GABA-containing pallidosubthalamic projection
in the rat. Eur J Neurosci 2:500–511.
Smith Y, Parent A (1986) Neuropeptide Y-immunoreactive neurons in the
striatum of the cat and monkey: morphological characteristics, intrinsic organization and co-localization with somatostatin. Brain Res
372:241–252.
Smith Y, Parent A, Seguela P, Descarries L (1987) Distribution of GABAimmunoreactive neurons in the basal ganglia of the squirrel monkey
(Samiri sciureus). J Comp Neurol 259:50–61.
Smith Y, Bevan MD, Shink E, Bolam JP (1998) Microcircuitry of the direct
and indirect pathways of the basal ganglia. Neuroscience 86:353–387.
Somogyi P, Bolam JP, Smith AD (1981) Monosynaptic cortical input and
local axon collaterals of identified striatonigral neurons. A light and
electron microscopic study using the Golgi-peroxidase transportdegeneration procedure. J Comp Neurol 195:567–584.
Staines WA, Atmadja S, Fibiger HC (1981) Demonstration of a pallidostriatal pathway by retrograde transport of HRP-labeled lectin. Brain
Res 206:446–450.
Staines WA, Fibiger HC (1984) Collateral projections of neurons of the
rat globus pallidus to the striatum and substantia nigra. Exp Brain
Res 56:217–220.
Steiner H, Gerfen CR (1993) Cocaine-induced c-fos messenger RNA
is inversely related to dynorphin expression in striatum. J Neurosci
13:5066–5081.
Surmeier DJ, Eberwine J, Wilson CJ, Cao Y, Stefani A, Kitai ST (1992)
Dopamine receptor subtypes colocalize in rat striatonigral neurons.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89:10178–10182.
Surmeier DJ, Reiner A, Levine MS, Ariano MA (1993) Are neostriatal
dopamine receptors co-localized?. Trends Neurosci 16:299–305.
Surmeier DJ, Song W-J, Yan Z (1996) Coordinated expression of dopamine receptors in neostriatal medium spiny neurons. J Neurosci
16:6579–6591.
Takagi H, Somogyi P, Somogyi J, Smith AD (1983) Fine structural studies on a type of somatostatin-immunoreactive neuron and its synaptic connections in the rat neostriatum: a correlated light and electron
microscopic study. J Comp Neurol 214:1–16.

28

Tennyson VM, Barrett RE, Cohen G, Cote L, Heikkila R, Mytilneou C
(1972) The developing neostriatum of the rabbit: correlation of fluorescence histochemistry, electron microscopy, endogenous dopamine
levels, and [3H]dopamine uptake. Brain Res 46:251–285.
van der Kooy D, Fishell G (1987) Neuronal birthdate underlies the development of striatal compartments. Brain Res 401:155–161.
Vincent SR, Johansson O, Hökfelt T, Skirboll L, Elde RP, Terenius L,
Kimmel J, Goldstein M (1983a) NADPH-diaphorase: a selective
histochemical marker for striatal neurons containing both somatostatin- and avian pancreatic polypeptide (APP-) like immunoreactivity. J
Comp Neurol 217:252–263.
Vincent SR, Staines WA, Fibiger HC (1983b) Histochemical demonstration of separate populations of somatostatin and cholinergic neurons
in the rat striatum. Neurosci Lett 35:111–114.
Voorn P, Jorritsma-Byham B, Dijk CV, Buijs RM (1986) The dopaminergic innervation of the ventral striatum in the rat: a light- and
electron-microscopical study with antibodies against dopamine.
J Comp Neurol 251:84–99.
Webster KE (1961) Cortico-striate interrelations in the albino rat. J Anat
95:532–544.
Wilson CJ, Groves PM (1980) Fine structure and synaptic connections
of the common spiny neuron of the rat neostriatum: a study employing intracellular inject of horseradish peroxidase. J Comp Neurol
194:599–615.

Handbook of Basal Ganglia Structure and Function

Wilson CJ, Phelan KD (1982) Dual topographic representation of neostriatum in the globus pallidus of rats. Brain Res 243:354–359.
Wilson CJ (1986) Postsynaptic potentials evoked in spiny neostriatal projection neurons by stimulation of ipsilateral and contralateral neocortex. Brain Res 367:201–213.
Wilson CJ (1987) Morphology and synaptic connections of crossed corticostriatal neurons in the rat. J Comp Neurol 263:567–580.
Wilson CJ, Chang HT, Kitai ST (1990) Firing patterns and synaptic
potentials of identified giant aspiny interneurons in the rat neostriatum. J Neurosci 10:508–519.
Xu ZC, Wilson CJ, Emson PC (1989) Restoration of the corticostriatal
projection in rat neostriatal grafts: electron microscopic analysis.
Neuroscience 29:539–550.
Yeterian EH, Hoesen GWV (1978) Cortico-striate projections in the rhesus monkey: The organization of certain cortico-caudate connections.
Brain Res 139:43–63.
Yung KK, Bolam JP, Smith AD, Hersch SM, Ciliax BJ, Levey AI (1995)
Immunocytochemical localization of D1 and D2 dopamine receptors in the basal ganglia of the rat: light and electron microscopy.
Neuroscience 65:709–730.
Zheng T, Wilson CJ (2002) Corticostriatal combinatorics: the implications
of corticostriatal axonal arborizations. J Neurophysiol 87:1007–1017.

